When a Winter Quarters card is turned up, stop
play and swap it with the played card. Conduct a
Winter Quarters Round in the sequence of phases
below for each Winter Quarters card. The Se-
quence of Play sheet and board also list this sequence. Note
that each Winter Quarters card has an event that will take
effect at the end of the Reset Phase of the Winter Quarters
Round.
6.1 Victory Check Phase
If any Faction has met its victory conditions (all victory con-
ditions are positive for at least one Faction), the game ends
(exceptions: Non-player option; one-player). See victory (7.2)
to determine winner and rank order. Otherwise, continue with
the Winter Quarters Round. After conducting the final Win-
ter Quarters card’s Winter Quarters Round Support Phase
(6.4.3), determine victory per 7.2.
6.2 Supply Phase
6.2.1 Extended Supply Lines: Check each Faction’s units to
see if they are in supply:
British: British cubes are in supply if they are in a space with
a British Fort or in a City with British Control.
If not, the British must:
• Pay one Resource per space, or
• Remove cubes to Available, or
• Shift the space one level toward Active Opposition. If no
shift possible and no Resource paid, remove to Available.
Note: This does not apply to British Regulars in the West
Indies.
Patriots: Patriot Militia and Continentals are in supply if they
are in a space with a Patriot Fort, or a Colony or City with
Rebellion Control.
If not, the Patriots may either pay one Resource per space or
remove one for every two total Patriot units there (rounding
down) to Available.
French: French Regulars are in supply if they are in a space
with a Patriot Fort, or a Colony or City with Rebellion Control.
If not, French may either move those units to the nearest space
with a Rebellion Fort or pay one Resource per space. If not
possible, return these French Regulars to Available.
Note: This does not apply to French Regulars in the West
Indies.
Indians: If no Villages are on the map, Indians place one Vil-
lage in any one Indian Reserve Province. Indian War Parties are
in supply if they are in a space with a Village or in an Indian
Reserve Province.
If not, the Indians may either pay one Resource per space or
move the War Parties to the nearest Province with a Village.
6.2.2 West Indies Battle: French must conduct a free Battle in
the West Indies if French and British pieces are present, per
the Battle Procedure (3.6). French then British may return any
friendly remaining units to Available and/or pay one Resource
if any remain.
6.3 Resources Phase
Add Resources to each Faction as follows, to a maximum of 50:
6.3.1 British Earnings: Add to Resources the number of Brit-
ish Forts plus population of non-Blockaded British Controlled
Cities. +5 if British Control West Indies.
6.3.2 Indians Earnings: Add to Resources half the number of
Villages on the map (rounding down).
6.3.3 Patriots Earnings: Add to Resources the number of Pa-
triot Forts plus half the number of Rebellion Controlled spaces
not including the West Indies (rounding down).
6.3.4 French Earnings: Before TOA: Add to Resources two
times Squadron/Blockade markers in West Indies. After TOA:
Add to Resources FNI level plus population of Cities not British
Controlled. +5 if Rebellion Controls West Indies.
6.4 Support Phase
The British then the Patriots may spend Resources to affect
Support and Opposition. The game ends if this is the final
Winter Quarters Round.
6.4.1 Reward Loyalty. The British may spend Resources to build
Support in British Controlled spaces with both one or more
British Regulars and one or more Tories. Every one Resource
spent removes one Raid or Propaganda marker—once no Raid
or Propaganda is in a space—shifts it one level toward Active
Support to a maximum of two levels per space.
6.4.2 Committees of Correspondence. The Patriots may spend
Resources to encourage Opposition in Rebellion Controlled
spaces with Patriot pieces. Every one Resource spent removes
one Raid marker or—once no Raid is in a space—shifts it one
level toward Active Opposition to a maximum of two levels
per space.
6.4.3 Game End? If this the final Winter Quarters Round
(2.4.1), the game ends. See Victory (7.3). If not, continue with
the Redeployment Phase.
Note: The final round omits Redeployment Phase, Desertion
Phase, and Reset Phase (6.5-6.7).
6.5 Redeployment Phase
6.5.1 Leader Change. Consult the Event card on deck. If
possible, the first Faction on that card must make a Leader
Change. The Leader Change Summary below shows the Leader
progression from the current Leader. If no further changes can
be made for that Faction, then no action is taken. The French do
not make Leader Changes until after the Treaty of Alliance
has been played. If the Leader is changed, set aside the current
Leader marker and replace it with the new Leader marker.
Leader Change Summary
British:
• If Gage, replace with Howe.
• If Howe, replace with Clinton.
• If Clinton, no further Leader Changes.
French
• No changes before Treaty of Alliance.
• If Rochambeau, replace with Lauzun.
• If Lauzun, no further Leader Changes.
Indians
• If Joseph Brant, replace with Cornplanter.
• If Cornplanter, replace with Dragging Canoe.
• If Dragging Canoe, no further Leader Changes.
Patriots
• No Leader Changes.
6.5.2 Leader Redeployment. Each Faction may redeploy its
Leader marker to a space with same Faction’s pieces or Available
in the following order: Indians, French, British and Patriots.
6.5.3 British Release Date. British move pieces from Unavail-
able box to Available box on the British Release Date Schedule
in the Scenario instructions. If there are fewer units in the
Unavailable box than are to be moved to the Available box,
then move only those that are in Unavailable.
6.5.4 French Naval Intervention (After Treaty of Alliance).
Lower FNI one level. Remove one Blockade to West Indies.
The French may rearrange any remaining Blockades on Cities.
6.6 Desertion Phase
6.6.1 Patriot Desertion. Remove 1 in 5 Militia and 1 in 5
Continentals from the map (rounding down). Indians choose
the first Militia and first Continental to desert, then Patriots
choose the remainder.
6.6.2 Tory Desertion. Remove 1 in 5 Tories from the map
(rounding down). French choose the first Tory to desert, then
British choose the remainder.
6.7 Reset Phase
Prepare for the next card as follows:
• Remove all Raid and Propaganda markers.
• Mark all Factions Eligible.
• Move cubes from the Casualties box to their Available box.
• Flip all Militia and War Parties to Underground.
• Reveal the draw deck’s new top card.
• Resolve any applicable Event on the Winter Quarters
card.
