This section governs actions by any Factions beyond those
represented by a player, for solitaire or as an alternative to the
No Non-Player option for two or three players (1.5). See also
the Playbook’s Non-Player Examples of Play.
Each Non-player Faction has a flowchart determining its ac-
tions. Due to space constraints, the instructions on the flow-
charts are often heavily abbreviated. They are also described in
more detail in rule sections 8.4 - 8.7, so whenever the flowcharts
seem unclear, please refer to the rulebook.
Note: In the flowcharts, the short-hands “Rebel” and “Pop”
are used instead of “Rebellion” and “Population” respectively.
Note: Non-player Factions may not act only in their own
direct interest. Like players, they sometimes help, sometimes
harm, one another.
Important: If playing solitaire, be sure to read the special
one-player victory conditions (8.8) before you start!
8.1 Non-Player Sequence of Play
The Non-player flowcharts describe the order in which the Non-
players attempt to execute the options available to them. Op-
tions that would be illegal to execute are ignored. Non-players
must follow all rules in chapters 1-7 except for the following:
• Commands Not Limited. Whenever a Non-player Faction
by the Sequence of Play (2.3.4) is to execute a Limited
Command (2.3.5), it instead executes a full Command and
Special Activity. Non-players execute free LimComs granted
by Event (5.3) normally as LimComs, using the flowchart
to select the Command but executing it in a maximum of
one space (or with a maximum of one destination space, as
appropriate for the Command selected) and with no Special
Activity (unless the Event grants that too).
• No voluntary removal. Non-player Factions never use the
1.4.1 option to take their own forces from the map in order
to place them elsewhere when they have no appropriate pieces
Available.
• Event, Command or Pass? If a Non-player Faction has the
option to execute an Event, look at that Faction’s symbol on
the card. If it is underlined by a sword icon ( ), the
Faction will automatically ignore the Event and continue with
the flowchart, otherwise the conditions listed in the “Event
or Command?” box on the flowchart determines whether or
not the Non-player will opt for the Event. If the Faction’s
symbol is underlined by a Brown Bess Musket icon ( ),
there are special Event Instructions (8.3.1) on the back of
the Random Spaces sheet that can affect this decision. If
the Faction does not play the Event, follow the flowchart to
see whether it Passes (2.3.3) or executes a Command and
Special Activity.
• Paying Resource Costs. A Non-player Faction that has too
few Resources to pay even the minimum amount possible for
the selected Command (e.g., Non-player French attempting
to Muster with only 1 Resource to spend) immediately follows
the flowchart instructions as if the Faction were unable to
execute any of the instructions for the Command, until
another Command that it can afford to execute is found.
The same applies if an allied Faction is unable to pay for a
combined Command (e.g., if Non-player Indians attempt
to Scout (3.4.3) but the British are unable to pay). If it has
sufficient Resources to execute at least some instructions of
the selected Command, it pays the appropriate Resource
cost when it selects each space, or as soon as any instruction
of the Command itself is executed (i.e., not counting any
accompanying Special Activity) in case the Command is of
a type that does not select any specific space (e.g., Garrison
(8.4.1) or Roderigue Hortalez et Cie (8.6.1, 8.6.3)).
• Brilliant Strokes. Non-player French plays the Treaty
of Alliance as soon as they are Eligible (even if not 1st or
2nd Eligible), and the sum of Squadrons in WI + Available
French Regulars + half of Cumulative British Casualties
exceed 15, and no Winter Quarters card is showing. Non-
player Factions will not play any other Brilliant Stroke
Events until the Treaty of Alliance has been played, and
then only when certain Faction-specific conditions apply
(8.4.11, 8.5.8, 8.6.11, 8.7.8). Rule 8.3.7 describes Non-player
execution of these Brilliant Stroke Events.
Note: While the entire CBC counts towards allowing the
Treaty of Alliance for players, Non-player French only
count only half of it in order to ensure that they have a rea-
sonable number of Regulars in play before entering the war.
• Non-player Leader Movement. During Campaigns, Non-
player Leaders follow the largest group of units from their
own Faction that moves from (or stays in) their origin space.
If two or more such groups are of the same size, select which
one the Leader joins randomly.
8.1.1 Events, Commands, and Special Activities
To execute an Event with a Non-player, follow the section below
about Non-player Events and any individual Event instructions
on the reverse of the Random Spaces sheet (8.3.1). To execute a
Non-player Faction’s Commands and Special Activities, see the
Non-Player flow charts and the rules section below governing
that Faction’s actions.
Guidelines:
Unless otherwise specified, carry out whatever actions apply
to the maximum extent (such as in the most spaces or with
the most pieces allowed and only as long as needed pieces
and Resources are available). Normal Resource costs, require-
ments, and procedures apply.
The terms “most Support” and “most Opposition” refer to
the value a space contributes to the Total Support or Total
Opposition score, i.e., the Support or Opposition level times
the Population of the space.
Play Note: To more easily implement Commands that move
pieces (March, Garrison, Raid, Scout, 8.4-8.7), first identify
which pieces can move, then their destinations.
8.1.2 Pieces and Resources. The Random Spaces sheet summa-
rizes the following. Unless the instruction or Event text being
executed specify which pieces to place, remove or move, once
spaces involved are selected, Non-player Factions:
• As far as possible, place friendly Forts and Villages, then
Militia or War Parties, then alternating Regulars and
Continentals/Tories beginning with whichever is fewest in
the space (Regulars if even).
• Remove friendly pieces, first alternating Regulars and
Continentals/Tories, beginning with whichever is most in
the space (Regulars if even) but if possible without removing
the last Tory/Continental in any space, then Active before
Underground Militia or War Parties, and finally Forts and
Villages.
• Move friendly pieces from Unavailable first if possible, then
from Available. Move Unavailable or Casualty pieces and
markers to Available or the map in this order: Blockades,
Forts, Continentals/ Tories, then Regulars.
• As far as possible, target or remove enemy Forts and Villages,
then Militia or War Parties, then alternating Regulars and
Continentals/Tories beginning with whichever is fewest
in the space (Regulars if even). Within that, target enemy
Underground Militia or War Parties before Active ones.
• Remove enemy pieces to be replaced even if no pieces are
available to replace them. (For friendly pieces, see 8.3.3.)
• March so as to get as many Underground Militia or War
Parties as possible to the destination (3.3.2, 3.4.2). Within
that requirement, March Active Militia or War Parties first.
8.1.3 Selecting Spaces. When executing Commands and Special
Activities by the priorities on the Non-Player flowcharts (8.4
to 8.7), select spaces for each listed priority in order until there
are no more legal candidate spaces or actions for that priority,
or until any space limit within that priority is reached. Then
move on to the next priority and do the same, until any overall
space limit for the Command or Special Activity is reached, or
until the Faction runs out of Resources (if applicable). Break
ties within each priority by selecting equal candidates randomly
as described below (8.2), unless a subsequent priority explicitly
modifies the selection (using a “within…” or similar statement).
8.2 Random Spaces
If several candidate Province or Cities have equal priority for
a Non-player Command, Special Activity, or Event, select one
using the Random Spaces table:
• Roll 1D3 to find the column on the table, and 1D6 to find
the row. If the box names two spaces, choose the top space
first if possible.
Note: The boxes show Population of each space.
EXAMPLE: Choose Florida before South Carolina.
• If the resulting space is not a candidate, move down the
column until one is reached. Follow the arrows, moving from
the bottom of one column to the top of the next and from
Massachusetts to Quebec City (or just follow the arrows on
the Random Spaces Map).
• Carry out as much of the action as possible in the candidate
space reached, then roll again to select another space only if
needed.
Play Note: If players agree, choose among a few spaces by
equal chance die roll instead.
8.3 Non-Player Events
Note: Events will not always benefit the executing Non-player
Faction directly.
8.3.1 Event Instructions. If the Faction Symbol is underlined by
a Brown Bess Musket icon ( ), there are special instruc-
tions for that Event on the reverse side of the Random Spaces
sheet. These instructions can affect whether the Faction plays
the Event or continues with the flowchart, e.g., by making the
Event Ineffective (8.3.3).
When a Faction plays an Event that gives free Commands or
Special Activities (5.3) to another Non-player Faction, or forces
it to make other choices (e.g., to remove some of its pieces),
the 2nd Faction’s Event instructions (if any) apply to how it
executes those actions.
8.3.2 Dual-Use Events. Unless Event Instructions (8.3.1) say
otherwise, Non-player Patriot and French executing a Dual-
Use Event (5.2) use the shaded text, while Non-player British
and Indian use unshaded text. If there is only one Event Text,
all Factions use it.
8.3.3 Ineffective Events. If an Event, after any Event Instruc-
tions (8.3.1) are taken into account, would have no effect at
all (not even manipulating Eligibility), or where the only ef-
fect would be to remove one or more friendly pieces without
replacing them with other friendly pieces, or the Event shifts
the difference between Support and Opposition in favor of the
enemy side, a Non-player Faction will consider it to be Inef-
fective and choose a Command and Special Activity instead.
8.3.4 Event Placement. Place, remove, or relocate as many
pieces (per 8.1.2) as Events, availability (1.4.1), and stacking
(1.4.2) allow. When allowed and unless otherwise specified,
Non-player Factions place or move friendly pieces from out of
Unavailable then from Available.
8.3.5 Events: Who, What, and Where. Unless the Event text
or Event instruction (8.3.1) says otherwise:
• When there is a choice of who gets Event benefits (such
as Resources, free Commands, or placing pieces), select the
executing Faction, then the other friendly Faction, then a
random enemy, Non-player first. If the Event effects are
harmful (such as removing pieces, Activating War Parties or
Militia, or similar), select a random enemy, player first.
• For any choices as part of free Commands (including
Limited Commands) or Special Activities, use that Faction’s
priorities (8.4-8.7). For multiple free Commands (such as
“March then Battle”), use the priorities for the first. Where
the priorities are not applicable, choose pieces per 8.1.2 and
spaces randomly (8.2).
Note: If there is a choice among free Commands, use the
Faction’s flowchart to select one, ignoring any flowchart
instructions to play Events or Pass. If there is a choice
among free Special Activities without a Command, follow
the flowcharts to see which Command and Special Activity
is selected, but execute only the Special Activity.
• If a Non-player Faction executes an Event due to one of the
“Event or Command?” questions on the flowchart, select
as many spaces as possible that match that question before
selecting other spaces (if any).
• Select spaces for shifts in Support or Opposition per 8.3.6
below.
• Within the above (if applicable), select Event spaces to
ensure that as many Forts and Villages then other pieces as
possible are placed, removed, or replaced. When removing
enemy pieces, use the priorities in 8.1.2 above. If friendly
pieces are to be removed and there is a choice, remove the
other Faction’s pieces.
• Otherwise, select spaces randomly (8.2).
8.3.6 Events that Shift Support/Opposition. Unless otherwise
specified, Non-player Factions select spaces for Event effects
that shift Support or Opposition as follows:
• Royalist Factions for the highest gain in Support, then the
highest loss in Opposition. If the difference between Support
and Opposition would shift in favor of the Rebellion, the
Royalist Non-player Faction instead executes a Command
and Special Activity.
• Rebellion Factions for the highest gain in Opposition,
then the highest loss in Support. If the difference between
Opposition and Support would shift in favor of the Royalists,
the Rebellion Non-player Faction instead executes a
Command and Special Activity.
8.3.7 Brilliant Stroke. Non-player British, Indians and
French holding a Brilliant Stroke card other than the
Treaty of Alliance will play when the Treaty of Alliance
has been played, that Faction is Eligible, no Winter Quarters
card is showing, and the Faction’s specific conditions for playing
the card are met (8.4.11, 8.5.8, 8.6.11, 8.7.8). If two or three
Non-players play Brilliant Stroke at the same time, they
trump one another normally.
To execute a Brilliant Stroke Event other than the Treaty
of Alliance, follow the executing Faction’s flowchart to select
the first Limited Command that both matches the flowchart
priorities and can involve that Faction’s Leader. If no such
Limited Command is possible, the Brilliant Stroke play
is aborted. Use the flowchart to select the Special Activity to
match the first Command, but if possible execute it indepen-
dently (e.g., ignoring what spaces were selected for a LimCom
Muster or Garrison Command when executing a Skirmish
Special Activity). Then use the flowchart again to select the
second Limited Command.
Note: This is less flexible than a human player’s execution
of a Brilliant Stroke, but ensures that the Non-player’s
Brilliant Stroke play will be legal. An example of Non-
player British execution of a Brilliant Stroke Event can
be found in the Playbook.
8.3.8 Other Event Choices. When a Non-player Faction while
executing an Event has a choice that is not otherwise covered
above, choose randomly among the possibilities.
8.4 Non-Player British Actions
When Non-player British are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will
ignore the Event if the British Faction Symbol is underlined
with a sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event,
check any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the
unshaded Event text if at least one of the following conditions
are met:
• Opposition exceeds Support, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Royalist side
(including by removing a Blockade from a Support City by
reducing FNI, but not by free Battles).
• The Event places any British pieces from Unavailable.
• The Event places Tories in an Active Opposition space with
none already, a British Fort in a Colony with none already,
or any Regulars in a City or Colony.
• The Event inflicts Rebellion Casualties (including a free
Skirmish or Battle, applying any additional conditions in
8.4.4 or 8.4.1).
• The British Control at least five Cities, the Event is Effective
(8.3.3), and a D6 rolls “5” or higher.
If the British do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity if British Resources exceed 0, otherwise
Pass (2.3.3).
8.4.1 Garrison. If the British are to execute a Command and
have a total of 10 or more Regulars in all Cities and Provinces
on the map combined, and a City without a Patriot Fort is
Rebellion Controlled, the British Garrison (3.2.2) as follows:
• First execute Naval Pressure, or if that is not possible,
Skirmish.
• Then Garrison. When executing movements per the bullets
below, leave two more Royalist than Rebellion pieces in each
origin space with British Control, and remove the last Regular
only from spaces with Population 0 or Active Support. Do
not move Regulars to any City where a Skirmish has been
executed.
o Move just enough Regulars to add British Control of Cities,
first where there are the most Rebellion pieces without a
Patriot Fort, then to New York City, then random.
o Then move additional Regulars, first to give each British
Controlled City without Active Support at least one
Regular, then to give each British Controlled City at least
three British cubes of any types beginning with those Cities
that have Underground Militia.
• If no Regulars have moved yet, abort the Garrison Command
and execute a Muster (8.4.2) instead.
• If any Regulars did move, Activate Underground Militia
everywhere possible, then displace the largest possible
number of Rebellion pieces, first to a Province with the most
Opposition then with least Support, within that to the lowest
Population possible.
NAVAL PRESSURE: Execute Naval Pressure as follows:
• If FNI > 0 and Gage or Clinton is the British Leader, remove
one Blockade, first from a City selected for Battle, then from
the City with most Rebellion pieces without a Patriot Fort,
then from the City with the most Support.
• Otherwise, if FNI is 0, add +1D3 British Resources.
• If neither of the above is possible, instead Skirmish.
SKIRMISH: Execute Skirmish as follows:
Skirmish first in the West Indies, then where there is exactly
one British Regular, then per the highest priority possible in
the bullets below:
• Remove as many Rebellion cubes as possible, first whichever
type is least in the space, removing one British Regular if
necessary.
• If it is not possible to remove any Rebellion cubes, instead
remove one Rebellion piece, first where there is only one
Rebellion piece in a space, within that first in a City.
• If Clinton is in the space, remove one additional Militia if
possible.
• If no Skirmish is possible, instead execute Naval Pressure.
If that is not possible either, the British execute no Special
Activity.
8.4.2 British Muster. If the British did not select Garrison and
a D6 roll is less than the number of British Regulars Available,
or if the British selected a Garrison or March Command but
were unable to execute any of the instructions, they Muster
(3.2.1) in up to four spaces as follows:
• Place as many Regulars as possible, first in spaces that are
Neutral or at either Passive Opposition or Passive Support,
then elsewhere; within that first to add British Control,
then where Tories are the only British units present, then
elsewhere; within each of those first in the spaces with highest
Population.
• Then place Tories, first where Regulars are the only British
units (within that, first where Regulars were placed above),
then to change Control of the most Population, then in
Colonies with less than five British Cubes and no British
Fort.
• Then Reward Loyalty or place a Fort, if possible in one of the
spaces already selected above, otherwise if fewer than four
spaces have been selected yet in one additional Muster space:
o If Opposition exceeds Support + 1D3 or if no British Forts
are Available, Reward Loyalty in one space per 8.4.5.
o If no Reward Loyalty was executed, place a Fort in a Colony
with no British Fort already, five or more British cubes and
room. Remove British cubes per 8.1.2.
• If any of the Muster instructions above were executed and
no Special Activity has been used yet, also Skirmish (8.4.1)
or, if that is not possible, Naval Pressure (8.4.1).
IF NONE: If no Muster is possible, then March (8.4.3) or, if
that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).
8.4.3 British March. If the British did not select either Garrison
or Muster, and there is no space (nor WI) with both British
and at least 2 Active Rebellion pieces where British Regulars
plus Leader outnumber all Rebellion pieces plus Leaders, or
if the British selected a Battle or Muster Command but were
unable to execute any of the instructions, then March (3.2.3)
in or into up to four destination spaces as follows:
• When executing the bullets below, do not move any pieces
needed for British Control of the origin space, nor remove
the last Tory or War Party from any space, nor the last British
Regular from a space with British Control but no Active
Support.
o First identify all groups of British units able to March.
o Moving the largest groups first, add British Control to
Cities, then Colonies (but not Indian Reserve Provinces),
for a total of up to two spaces; within each first where there
are Rebellion cubes, then with the highest Population. Stop
moving groups into each destination space once British
Control is established. Use Common Cause to include
War Parties (Active first) if this would increase the size of
a Marching group moving into an adjacent Province.
o Then March to spaces with Population one or two that are
not at Active Support, first to add Tories where Regulars are
the only British units, then to add Regulars where Tories
are the only British units; within each, move first to March
destinations already selected above.
o Then March in place to Activate Underground Militia, first
in spaces with Support.
If no Common Cause was used during the March, instead
Skirmish or Naval Pressure per 8.4.1.
IF NONE: If no March is possible, the British instead Muster
(8.4.2) or, if that is not possible, Pass (2.3.3).
COMMON CAUSE: If the British either March to add Brit-
ish Control or Battle, they use Common Cause to make up the
difference between the number of Regulars and Tories in the
group, except as follows:
• If March, do not use the last War Party (Underground if
possible) in the space.
• If Battle, do not use the last Underground War Party in the
space.
8.4.4 British Battle. If the British did not select either Garrison
or Muster, and there is at least one space (including WI) with
at least two Rebellion pieces that are outnumbered by British
Regulars+Leader, Battle (3.2.4) as follows:
• Select all spaces (and WI) with Rebellion Forts and/or cubes
where the Royalist Force Level plus modifiers exceeds the
Rebellion Force Level plus modifiers, first where there are
most British pieces. Use Common Cause (8.4.3) wherever
possible to increase the British Force Level.
• If Common Cause cannot increase the Force Level in any
Battle space, instead Skirmish (8.4.1) in a space not selected
for Battle, or if that is not possible, Naval Pressure (8.4.1). If
that is not possible either, execute no Special Activity.
• Then resolve Battles in all selected spaces.
IF NONE: If no spaces are selected for Battle, the British
instead March per 8.4.3 above.
8.4.5 Reward Loyalty. If more than one space is eligible to
Reward Loyalty, first select the space or spaces with the lowest
total of Raid and Propaganda markers, within that where the
largest change in (Support – Opposition) is possible. Do not
Reward Loyalty in a space if only Raid and/or Propaganda
markers would be removed.
8.4.6 Indian Trade Special Activity. If the Indians request
Trade and Indian Resources are less than British Resources,
roll 1D6: if the result is < British Resources, offer to transfer
half the number rolled (rounding up) from British Resources
to Indian Resources.
8.4.7 British Supply. In each City and Colony where British
cubes are out of supply (6.2.1), pay for supply if the cubes are
needed to prevent Committees of Correspondence or allow
Reward Loyalty during the Support Phase (6.4) given expected
British earnings from Forts and Cities (but not the West Indies)
(6.3). Pay with Resources as far as possible, first in spaces with
highest Population. In each remaining space that needs Supply,
shift one level towards Active Opposition if possible. Remove
the cubes to Available if they are not needed for the Support
Phase or if no supply is possible.
8.4.8 West Indies Battle. If the British Control the West Indies
after the Supply Phase Battle (6.2.2), pay one Resource to keep
the Regulars there. Otherwise return all British Regulars from
the West Indies to Available.
8.4.9 British Leader Redeployment. Redeploy the British
Leader (6.5.2) to the space with the most British Regulars.
8.4.10 Loyalist Desertion. Remove Tories so as to change the
least Control possible, if possible without removing the last
Tory from any space.
8.4.11 British Brilliant Stroke. Non-player British will use
its Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance Event has
been played, the British Leader is in a space with four or more
British Regulars, and a Rebellion player Faction is 1st Eligible
or the Patriots play their Brilliant Stroke card.
8.5 Non-Player Patriot Actions
When Non-player Patriots are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will
ignore the Event if the Patriot Faction Symbol is underlined
with a sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event,
check any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the
Event if at least one of the following conditions are met:
• Support exceeds Opposition, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Rebellion side
(including by increasing FNI, but not by free Battles).
• The Event places Underground Militia in at least one Active
Support or Village space that has none already.
• The Event places a Patriot Fort or removes an Indian Village.
• The Event adds at least three Patriot Resources.
• The Patriots have at least 25 pieces on the map, the Event is
Effective (8.3.3), and a D6 rolls “5” or higher.
If the Patriots do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity if Patriot Resources exceed 0, otherwise
Pass (2.3.3).
8.5.1 Patriot Battle. If any space has both Royalist pieces and
Rebellion cubes, and the total number of Rebellion cubes and
Leaders there outnumber all Active Royalist pieces combined,
the Patriots execute Battle (3.3.3) as follows:
• Select all spaces where the Rebellion Force Level (including as
many French as possible) plus modifiers exceeds the Royalist
Force Level plus modifiers. If Patriot Resources are too low
to pay for all such spaces, select the space with Washington
first, then the spaces with highest Population, then with the
largest number of Villages, then randomly.
• For each Battle space selected, if French Regulars are present
and French Resources exceed 0, pay one French Resource to
include as many French Regulars as possible.
• Then resolve all Battles.
If no spaces are selected for Battle, the Patriots instead Rally
(8.5.2).
For each space where the Rebellion side Wins the Day (3.6.8),
the Patriots execute a free Rally Command (8.5.2) in one
space. For each City where the Rebellion side Wins the Day,
the French may move any Blockades from that City to another
City with more Support.
If any Battles were resolved, execute a Partisans Special Activity
per below, or if that is not possible, Skirmish, or if that is not
possible, Persuasion. If none of these are possible, execute no
Special Activity.
PARTISANS: If Patriot Resources are 0, instead execute
Persuasion if possible. Otherwise, execute a Partisans Special
Activity (4.3.2) in a space with Underground Militia and enemy,
first to remove a Village, then to remove the most War Parties,
then the most British units (in both cases per the priorities in
8.1.2); within each first to add most Rebellion Control, then
to remove most British Control, then random.
SKIRMISH: If Patriot Resources are 0, instead execute Persua-
sion if possible. Otherwise, execute a Skirmish in a space with
Continentals and enemy, first to remove a British Fort, within
that first to add the most Rebellion Control, then to remove
the most British Control, then random.
PERSUASION: In up to three spaces with Rebellion Control
and Underground Militia, first spaces with Patriot Forts, Acti-
vate one Militia per space to add Patriot Resources.
8.5.2 Rally. If the Patriots did not select Battle, and Rally would
place a Patriot Fort or 1D6 rolls higher than the number of Un-
derground Militia on the map, or the Patriots selected a Battle
or Rabble-Rousing Command but were unable to execute it,
the Patriots Rally (3.3.1) in up to four spaces as follows:
• If Patriot Resources reach 0 during the Rally, the Patriots
immediately execute a Persuasion Special Activity (8.5.1)
before continuing the Rally Command.
• Place a Fort in each space with 4+ Patriot units and room, first
Cities, within that first in the spaces with highest Population.
• Then place Militia, first at each Patriot Fort with no other
Rebellion pieces, then if any Continentals are Available at
the Fort with the largest number of Militia already.
• In the Patriot Fort space with most Militia of those already
selected for Rally, replace all Militia except one Underground
with Continentals.
• Then, if any Patriot Fort is Available, place Militia in the
space with most Patriot units already, but no Patriot Fort.
• Then place Militia, first to change Control, then in spaces
not at Active Opposition, within each first in Cities, within
that first in the highest Population.
• Then, in one Fort space not already selected above, move in
all Active Militia from adjacent spaces that can be moved
without changing Control of their origin spaces, then flip
all Militia at the Fort Underground.
Then, if no Persuasion was used during the Rally, the Patriots
execute a Partisans Special Activity per 8.5.1, or if that is not
possible Skirmish, or if that is not possible, Persuasion. If none
of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no Rally is possible, the Patriots instead execute
Rabble-Rousing (8.5.3), or if that is not possible either, Pass
(2.3.3).
8.5.3 Rabble-Rousing. If the Patriots did not select Battle or
Rally, and Rabble-Rousing could shift any space towards Active
Opposition, or they selected a Rally or March Command but
were unable to execute it, the Patriots execute Rabble-Rousing
(3.3.4) as follows:
• If Patriot Resources reach 0 during Rabble-Rousing, the
Patriots immediately execute a Persuasion Special Activity
(8.5.1) before continuing the Command.
• Use Rabble-Rousing in each space that can be shifted towards
Active Opposition, first in spaces with Active Support, within
that first in the space with highest Population.
IF NONE: If no Rabble-Rousing is possible, the Patriots in-
stead Rally (8.5.2), or if that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).
Then, if no Persuasion was used during Rabble-Rousing, the
Patriots execute a Partisans Special Activity per 8.5.1, or if that
is not possible, Skirmish, or if that is not possible, Persuasion.
If none of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
8.5.4 Patriot March. If the Patriots did not select Battle or Rally,
and Rabble-Rousing could not shift any space towards Active
Opposition, the Patriots March (3.3.2) as follows:
• While executing the bullets below, lose no Rebellion Control,
leave an Active Patriot unit with each Patriot Fort, and leave
a Patriot unit (if possible an Underground Militia) in each
space that is not already at Active Opposition.
o First identify all groups of Patriot units able to March.
o Moving the largest groups first, add Rebellion Control to
two spaces, first with Villages, then Cities, then elsewhere;
within that first to the spaces with largest Population.
Stop moving groups into each destination once Rebellion
Control is established. If French Resources exceed 0,
include as many French Regulars as possible in the moves.

o Then March to get one Militia (Underground if possible)
into each space with none, first to change Control of the
most Population, then elsewhere.
Then execute a Partisans Special Activity per 8.5.1, or if that is
not possible, Skirmish, or if that is not possible, Persuasion. If
none of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no March moves can be executed, the Patriots
instead execute Rally (8.5.2).
8.5.5 Patriot Supply. The Patriots pay one Patriot Resource
for each space where removing Patriot pieces would change
Control, within those first where the British would otherwise
be able to Reward Loyalty, then in the spaces with most Vil-
lages, then with highest Population. In all other spaces where
Supply is needed, remove Patriot pieces per 8.1.2.
8.5.6 Patriot Leader Redeployment. Redeploy Washington to
the space with most Continentals.
8.5.7 Patriot Desertion. Remove Militia and Continentals so as
to change as little Control as possible, within that first without
removing the last Patriot unit from any space.
8.5.8 Patriot Brilliant Stroke. Non-player Patriots will use
its Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance Event
has been played, Washington is in a space with four or more
Continentals, and a player Faction is 1st Eligible.
8.5.9 Committees of Correspondence. If more than one space
is eligible for Committees of Correspondence, first select the
spaces with the lowest number of Raid markers, within that
where the largest change in (Opposition - Support) is possible.
Do not execute Committees of Correspondence in a space if
only Raid markers would be removed.
8.6 Non-Player French Actions
If Non-player French are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will ignore
the Event if the French Faction Symbol is underlined with a
sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event, check
any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the Event
if at least one of the following conditions are met:
• Support exceeds Opposition, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Rebellion side
(including by increasing FNI and placing a Blockade to
reduce Support), but not by free Battles.
• The Event moves French Regulars or Squadrons from
Unavailable.
• The Event places Available French pieces on the map.
• The Event inflicts British Casualties (including a free French
Battle, applying any additional priorities in 8.6.6. or 8.6.3).
• The Event adds French Resources.
• The Treaty of Alliance has been played, the Event is
Effective (8.3.3), and a D6 rolls “5” or higher.
If the French do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity if French Resources exceed 0, otherwise
Pass (2.3.3).
8.6.1 Roderigue Hortalez et Cie (before ToA). If the Treaty
of Alliance has not been played, and a D3 roll exceeds Pa-
triot Resources or the French were unable to execute French
Agent Mobilization (8.6.2), execute Roderigue Hortalez et Cie
(3.5.2) by spending up to 1D3 French Resources to increase
Patriot Resources.
Then execute a Préparer la Guerre Special Activity.
Préparer la Guerre (Before Treaty Of Alliance). Move one
Blockade marker from Unavailable to the West Indies. If no
Blockade markers are Unavailable, instead move up to three
French Regulars from Unavailable to Available. If neither
of these is possible, Non-player French executes no Special
Activity.
8.6.2 French Agent Mobilization (Before Treaty Of Alli-
ance). If the Treaty of Alliance has not been played and
the French did not execute Roderigue Hortalez et Cie, execute
French Agent Mobilization (3.5.1) by placing two Militia or, if
that is not possible, one Continental, in one of Quebec, New
York Colony, New Hampshire or Massachusetts, first to add
most Rebellion Control, then where there are most Patriot
units already.
Then execute a Préparer la Guerre Special Activity (8.6.1).
IF NONE: If no French Agent Mobilization was possible,
instead execute Roderigue Hortalez et cie (8.6.1).
8.6.3 Roderigue Hortalez Et Cie (After Treaty Of Al-
liance). If the Treaty of Alliance has been played and
the French were unable to execute a Muster (8.6.4), execute
Roderigue Hortalez et Cie by spending up to 1D3 French
Resources to add Patriot Resources.
If any Resources were transferred to the Patriots, execute a
Special Activity per the instructions below: Skirmish, or if that
is not possible, Préparer la Guerre, or if that is not possible
either, Naval Pressure. If none of these are possible, execute no
Special Activity.
SKIRMISH: Skirmish in the West Indies if possible, otherwise
in one space with both French and British that is not selected
for Battle or Muster. In the selected space, remove a British
Fort if possible, otherwise as many British cubes as possible.
PRÉPARER LA GUERRE (after Treaty of Alliance): If 1D6
rolls equal to or less than the number of Unavailable French
Regulars+Blockades, move one Blockade marker from Unavail-
able to the West Indies, or if that is not possible, move up to
three French Regulars from Unavailable to Available. If no
Blockades or French Regulars were moved from Unavailable
but French Resources = 0, add +2 French Resources.
NAVAL PRESSURE: Add one Blockade, first to a City selected
for Battle, then the City with most Support.
8.6.4 French Muster. If the Treaty of Alliance has been played
and a D6 roll is less than the number of Available French
Regulars, the French Muster (3.5.3) as follows:
• If fewer than four French Regulars are Available and WI
does not have Rebellion Control, place as many Regulars as
possible in WI.
• Otherwise, place as many Regulars as possible in a City
or Colony with Rebellion Control, first a space with
Continentals, then elsewhere.
Then execute Skirmish (8.6.3), or if that is not possible Préparer
la Guerre (8.6.1), or if that is not possible either Naval Pressure
(8.6.3). If none of these are possible, execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If the Muster instructions cannot be executed,
instead execute Roderigue Hortalez et cie (8.6.3).
8.6.5 French March. If the Treaty of Alliance card has been
played, the French did not select Muster or Roderigue Hortalez
et cie, and Rebellion cubes + Leaders do not outnumber British
pieces in a space with both, the French March (3.5.4) as follows:
• While executing the bullets below, lose no Rebellion Control.
• Within that restriction, March with as many French Regulars
and Continentals as possible to add Rebellion Control, first
in Cities, then Colonies, within each first to spaces with most
British pieces.
• Then March any French Regulars that are not in or adjacent
to a space with British pieces towards the nearest British.
• If neither of the above are possible, March one French Regular
to a space with both Patriots and British pieces.
Then execute a Special Activity: Skirmish (8.6.3), or if that is
not possible Préparer la Guerre (8.6.3), or if that is not pos-
sible either Naval Pressure (8.6.3). If none of these are possible,
execute no Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no March moves are possible, the French Muster
(8.6.4).
8.6.6 French Battle. If the Treaty of Alliance has been played
and the French did not select Muster, March or Roderigue
Hortalez et cie, and Rebellion cubes plus Leader outnumber
British pieces in at least one space with both, the French Battle
(3.5.5) as follows:
• Select all spaces with both French and British pieces where
the Rebellion Force Level (including Continentals if possible)
plus Battle Modifiers exceeds the Royalist Force Level plus
Battle Modifiers. Within that, select the space with highest
Population first. If there are no such spaces, abort the Battle
Command and instead execute a March (8.6.5).
• Then execute a Special Activity: Naval Pressure (8.6.3), or if
that is not possible Skirmish (8.6.3) in a space not selected
for Battle, or if that is not possible either Préparer la Guerre
(8.6.3). If none of these are possible, execute no Special
Activity.
Note: The order in which the Special Activities are at-
tempted is different for Battle than for the other French
Commands.
• Then resolve Battle in all selected spaces.
For each space where the Rebellion side Wins the Day (3.6.8),
the Patriots execute a free Rally Command (8.5.2) in one
space. For each City where the Rebellion side Wins the Day,
the French may move any Blockades from that City to another
City with more Support.
8.6.7 French Supply. The French pay one Resource for each
space where moving French Regulars would change Control.
Within each of these, pay first where the British would other-
wise be able to Reward Loyalty, then with highest Population.
In all other spaces where Supply is needed, move French pieces
to the nearest Patriot Fort (or if none, to Available).
8.6.8 West Indies Battle. If any French Regulars remain in
the West Indies after the Supply Phase Battle (6.2.2), pay one
Resource to keep them there if possible, otherwise return them
to Available.
8.6.9 French Redeployment. Redeploy the French Leader
(6.5.2) to a space with both French Regulars and Continentals
if possible, within that to the space with most French Regulars.
Remove a Blockade from the City with least Support; remaining
Blockades are moved to Cities with most Support.
8.6.10 Loyalist Desertion. Remove a Tory so as to change
Control of the most Population possible, then to remove the
last Tory in the space with most Population that is not already
at Active Support, then elsewhere.
8.6.11 French Brilliant Stroke. Non-player French will
use their Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance
Event has been played, the French Leader is in a space with four
or more French Regulars, and any player Faction is 1st Eligible
or the British play their Brilliant Stroke card.
8.7 Non-Player Indian Actions
When Non-player Indians are 1st or 2nd Eligible, they will
ignore the Event if the Indian Faction Symbol is underlined
with a sword. Otherwise, if they are Eligible to play the Event,
check any relevant Event Instructions (8.3.1), and execute the
Event if at least one of the following conditions are met:
• Opposition exceeds Support, and the Event will shift
Opposition and/or Support in favor of the Royalist side
(including by reducing FNI, but not by free Battles).
• The Event places at least one Indian Village or grants a free
Gather. (If so, place the Village in a space that already has
War Parties if possible.)
• The Event removes a Patriot Fort.
• There are at least four Indian Villages on the map, the Event
is Effective (8.3.3), and a D6 rolls five or higher.
If the Indians do not play the Event, they execute a Command
and Special Activity.
8.7.1 Raid. If the Indians are to execute a Command and Sup-
port plus 1D6 does not exceed Opposition, Raid (3.4.4) up to
three spaces as follows:
• Raid Colonies at Opposition with or adjacent to Underground
War parties (or within two spaces of Dragging Canoe), first
where Plunder will be possible after the Raid movement,
then elsewhere, within each in the spaces with the highest
Population.
• While executing the following bullets, do not remove the last
War Party from any Village space.
• Move an Underground War Party into each Raid target that
doesn’t already have at least one, or where War Parties do not
outnumber Rebellion pieces.

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play
• If Resources fall to zero during the Raid Command, Plunder
(or if that is not possible, Trade) before completing the Raid
Command.
• If no Raid is possible, instead execute Gather (8.7.2).
If no Special Activity was used during the Raid, instead War
Path after the Raid, or if that is not possible, Trade.
PLUNDER: Execute Plunder (4.4.3) in a Raid space with
more War Parties than Rebellion pieces, within that in the
highest Population.
WAR PATH: If Indian Resources are 0, execute Trade instead
if possible. Otherwise War Path in one space, first to remove
a Patriot Fort, then to remove the most Rebellion pieces pos-
sible per 8.1.2, within that first in a province with at least one
Village then elsewhere.
TRADE: If there is at least one Underground War Party at
a Village, Trade in the Village space with most Underground
War Parties, first requesting Resources from the British (if
Non-player Britiish, see 8.4.6 for results).
8.7.2 Gather. If the Indians did not select Raid, and Gather
would place two or more Villages or a D6 roll is less than the
number of War Parties Available, or if the Indians selected a
Raid or March Command but were unable to execute it, Gather
(3.4.1) in up to four spaces as follows:
• Place a Village in each space with room for one and at least
three War Parties (at least two War Parties if Cornplanter is
in the space), first in the space with the Indian Leader.
• Then place War Parties at Villages, first where there are enemy
pieces, then where there are no Underground War Parties,
then with the Indian Leader, then elsewhere.
• Then, if any Villages are Available, place War Parties in up
to two spaces with room for a Village, first where there are
exactly two War Parties already, then where there is exactly
one War Party, then elsewhere.
• Then, if no more War Parties are Available but fewer than four
Gather spaces have been selected, Gather in one additional
Village space to move in all adjacent Active War Parties
possible without adding any Rebellion Control, then flip all
Active War Parties in that space Underground.
After the Command, execute a War Path Special Activity (8.7.1)
or, if that is not possible, Trade. If neither is possible, do not
execute any Special Activity.
IF NONE: If no Gather is possible, the Indians instead March
(8.7.3), or if that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).
8.7.3 March. If the Indians did not select Raid or Gather and
no space has both a War Party and British Regulars, or if the
Indians selected a Scout or Gather Command but were unable
to execute it, the Indians March (3.4.2) into up to three spaces
as follows:
• When executing the following bullets, March first with
Underground then with Active War Parties, without either
moving the last War Party from any Village space, moving
the last 3 War Parties from a space where Gather could place
a Village, or adding any Rebellion Control.
• If at least one Village is Available, first March to get 3+ War
Parties in one additional Neutral or Passive space with room
for a Village.
• Then March to remove the most Rebellion Control possible,
first in spaces with no Active Support.
IF NONE: If no March is possible, the Indians instead Gather
(8.7.2), or if that is not possible either, Pass (2.3.3).
If any March moves were made, execute War Path (8.7.1), or
if that is not possible, Trade.
8.7.4 Scout. If the Indians did not select Raid or Gather, and at
least one space has both British Regulars and at least one War
Party, they Scout (3.4.3) into one space as follows:
• Move one War Party and the most Regulars and Tories
possible without losing British Control or adding Rebellion
Control in the origin space, first to a space with a Patriot Fort,
then to a Village space with enemy pieces, then to remove
the most Rebellion Control possible.
• Skirmish in the destination space to remove to remove a
Patriot Fort if possible, otherwise to remove the largest
number of enemy pieces possible.
If a Scout move was made, execute War Path (8.7.1), or if that
is not possible, Trade.
IF NONE: If no Scout move is possible, instead execute a
March (8.7.3).
8.7.5 Indian Supply. For each Colony with War Parties but no
Village, pay one Resource for Indian Supply first if moving the
War Parties would add Rebellion Control, then where Gather
could place a Village. If Indian Resources run out or neither
of the above conditions are met, move the War Parties in that
Colony to the nearest Village space.
8.7.6 Patriot Desertion. Remove the first Patriot Militia and
Continental first from spaces with Villages, then to remove
Rebellion Control, then to remove the last Patriot of that type
in a space, then elsewhere.
8.7.7 Indian Leader Redeployment. Redeploy Brant or Drag-
ging Canoe to the space with most War Parties. Redeploy
Cornplanter to a Neutral or Passive Province with two or more
War Parties and room for a Village; if there is no such Province,
Redeploy him to the space with most War Parties.
8.7.8 Indian Brilliant Stroke. Non-player Indians will use
its Brilliant Stroke card if the Treaty of Alliance Event
has been played, the Indian Leader is in a space with three or
more War Parties, and any player Faction is 1st Eligible or a
Rebellion Faction plays a Brilliant Stroke card other than
Treaty of Alliance.
8.7.9 Defending in Battle. If the Indians are Defenders in a
Battle in a space with at least one Village, Activate all but 1
Underground War Party.
8.8 One-Player Victory
A lone player plays either any one Faction against three Non-
players, or British and Indian together, or Patriot and French
together (1.5), with the remaining Factions controlled by Non-
players. A player playing two Factions together uses the lower
victory margin (7.3) of those two Factions.
To succeed, the player must avoid a win by any Non-player
through each Winter Quarters Round and have the highest
victory margin(s) after the final Round. The lone player never
wins during a Victory Phase (6.1, 7.2).
One-Player Difficulty Option
For greater challenge regardless of scenario or Period
Events Option (2.1) selected, beginning with the second
Winter Quarters Round, the player also must avoid having
a lower victory margin with any player Faction than any
Non-player Faction during each Victory Phase.
Non-Player Victory: If the player fails to avoid such an out-
come, the Non-player with the highest victory margin (ties to
French then Indian then Patriot) wins the War of Independence:
• If French: Vive la France! Although France’s treasury is
almost empty, the successful French intervention in America
has cost Britain even more dearly. France replaces Britain as
the leading power both in Europe and in the colonies …at
least until domestic unrest grows too strong.
• If Patriot: Freedom is ours! The United States of America
have won their independence and crushed their Indian
neighbors. In coming years, they will sweep across the width
of the entire continent and eventually even replace the British
as the leading power of the world—but that time is still far
in the future.
• If Indian: Proclamation Line confirmed! With the colonies
brought under firm control by the combined efforts of British
and Indians, King George and his Parliament guarantees the
rights of the native nations of America in the territories west
of the Proclamation Line of 1763. While skirmishes and
raids will continue, the frontier will remain stationary in the
Appalachians for several decades before population pressure
starts to force it westward again.
• If British: John Bull triumphant! With both the French and
the Patriots thoroughly defeated, Britain is indeed Great and
takes its rightful place as the leading power in the world. Its
Indian allies are soon forgotten and the colonists will press
westward once more—but under the Union Jack, not the
Star-Spangled Banner.
Player Draw or Victory: If the player does survive to the final
Round, subtract the highest Non-player victory margin from
the lowest player victory margin to gauge the outcome. A dif-
ference of 5 or less is a stalemate; six or more a victory for the
player’s Faction(s):
• 1 to 5: The struggle continues! Although all sides are
economically exhausted, none are willing to surrender. The
war in the Americas will continue until one of the European
powers becomes embroiled in a war closer to home and is
forced to withdraw its forces.
• 6 or more, Player as Patriots and/or French: Secession
successful! The United States is recognized as an independent
state and will soon expand far to the west at the expense of
both native nations and other Europeans.
• 6 or more, Player as British and/or Indians: Rebellion
defeated! The British Crown re-establishes firm control over
all its colonies. Expansion westward is slowed down by treaties
both with native nations and other European colonies
