1.1 General Course Of Play
In Liberty or Death, cards are played from the deck one at a
time with the current card in play as well as one card ahead
revealed to all players. Each Event card shows the order in which
the Factions become Eligible to choose either from a menu
of Commands and Special Activities or the card’s particular
Event. Executing an Event or Command renders that Faction
Ineligible to do so on the next card. Winter Quarters cards
mixed in with the Event cards provide periodic opportunities
for instant victory and activities such as collecting Resources.

1.3 The Map
The map shows the British Colonies of North America and
neighboring Provinces divided into various types of spaces.

Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play3© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC
1.3 The Map
The map shows the British Colonies of North America and
neighboring Provinces divided into various types of spaces.
1.3.1 Map Spaces. Map spaces include rural Provinces (Colo-
nies and Indian Reserve) and urban Cities. All spaces can hold
forces.
1.3.2 Provinces. Each Province shows a Population value (Pop)
of 0 to 2 (each Population value representing roughly 50,000
Colonists). Population value affects victory by counting toward
a Faction’s Support for or Opposition to the British (1.6).
Population value also affects some Commands (3.0).
1.3.3 Cities. Similarly, each City shows a Population value
of 1 to 2 (each Population value representing roughly 50,000
Colonists with adjustments made for economic value).
Note: The Cities of New York and Philadelphia are displaced
to the east to improve playability on the map. Their actual
location is marked by a smaller circle connected by a white
shaded area.
Naming Convention Note: When referring to Quebec City
and New York City, the word City always designates those
Cities. Otherwise “Quebec” and “New York” always refers to
the Province.
1.3.4 Indian Reserve Provinces. The map includes parts of the
Indian Reserve Provinces of Quebec, Northwest, Southwest
and Florida. These are considered Provinces but not Colonies.
They have 0 population.
1.3.5 Colonies. Colonies are Provinces that represent the thir-
teen British Colonies. Delaware and Maryland are combined
into one Colony space, as are Connecticut and Rhode Island;
as a result there are only eleven Colony spaces.
1.3.6 Adjacency. Adjacency affects the movement of forces and
implementation of certain Events. Any two spaces that border
on (touch) one another are adjacent.
1.3.7 West Indies. West Indies (WI) is a holding box that is
not in play until after Treaty of Alliance (TOA) is played.
It has 0 population.
Note: The West Indies have a number of characteristics de-
tailed in later sections regarding stacking (1.4.2), Squadron/
Blockade markers (1.9), Winter Quarters (6.2.2, 6.3.1), and
Battle (3.6).
1.3.9 Unavailable. Use the Unavailable French Forces box to
hold certain French Regulars and Squadrons/Blockades prior to
the French moving them to the Available French Forces box (or
the West Indies box in the case of the Squadrons/Blockades).
Use the Unavailable British Forces box to hold certain British
Regulars and Tories prior to their Release Date as designated
by the Scenario Set-up (2.1).
1.4 Pieces
The wooden pieces represent the Factions’ various forces: British
Regulars (red cubes) and Tories (green cubes), Patriot Militia
(blue hexagonal cylinders), Patriot Continentals (blue cubes),
French Regulars (white cubes), Indian War Parties (tan hex-
agonal cylinders), Indian Villages (tan discs), and all British and
Patriot Forts (five-pointed stars). Leaders are represented by
either round markers or stand-up markers (players may choose
to use one type or the other).
1.4.1 Availability and Removal. The Available Forces Table on
page 35 lists the number of pieces in the game and Leaders for
each Faction. Scenario set up (2.1) specifies units as Available
and Unavailable. Keep forces Available for placement in the
Available Forces box. Place Indian Villages, Patriot Forts and
British Forts in the highest-numbered empty spaces on the
Available Indian Villages, Available Patriot Forts or Available
British Forts tracks to show the number of on-map Forts and
Villages. This also helps track victory (7.0) and calculate Re-
sources added (6.3). Some French and British forces may be
Unavailable and will remain in the Unavailable Forces box until
moved to the Available Forces box by Special Activity, Event, or
during the Winter Quarters Redeployment Phase (6.5.3). Brit-
ish and French may have forces in the West Indies box—neither
Available, Unavailable nor on the map—and British, Patriots
and French forces can become Casualties (1.6.4). Otherwise,
forces removed from the map go to Available.
Unless otherwise instructed (by Event, 5.1), forces may only
be placed from or replaced with those in the Available boxes.
A piece to be replaced by a piece that is unavailable is simply
removed.
Important: Factions, while executing a Command, Special
Activity, or Event to place their own forces, may take them
from elsewhere on the map into Available if and only if the
desired force type is not Available.
EXAMPLE: Indians without Available War Parties could
remove War Parties during a Gather (3.4.1) in order to place
them Underground.
EXCEPTION: The British and French may not do so with
Regulars but may with Tories and Forts.
1.4.2 Stacking. No more than two Forts/Villages (of any Fac-
tions) may occupy a single City, Province or the West Indies.
Placing pieces (such as Forts or Villages via Muster (3.2.1,
3.5.3), Rally (3.3.1), Gather (3.4.1) or Event (5.1)) or moving
pieces may never violate stacking. The only pieces that may oc-
cupy the West Indies (1.3.7) are British and French Regulars,
British Forts and French Squadrons. Indian pieces may never
occupy a City space.
1.4.3 Underground/Active. Militia or War Parties are either
Underground-symbol end down-or Active-symbol end up.
Certain actions and Events flip them from one state to the other.
Villages, Forts and Cubes are always Active. Always set up and
place new Militia and War Parties Underground (including if
replacing a piece).
Note: Unless instructions specify “Underground” Militia or
War Parties, it is sufficient to “Activate” already Active Militia
or War Parties (they stay Active). Also, “moving” or “relocat-
ing” Militia or War Parties does not affect Underground
status unless specified.
1.5 Players & Factions
The game may have up to four players, each as one or more
Factions: the British (red and green), the Patriots (blue), the
Indians (tan), and the French (white). In a one-player game,
the player may play the British and Indians together, or the
Patriots and French, or any one Faction (8.8). Leftover Factions
are controlled either by rules section 8 as “Non-Players” or, if
preferred with two or three players, as below.
No Non-Player Option. With two or three players, the play-
ers (rather than the Non-Player rules, 8.0) may control any
leftover Factions:
• With two players, one player controls British and Indians
(Royalists), the other Patriots and French (Rebellion).
• With three players, a single player controls British and Indians
(Royalists) or, if preferred, Patriots and French (Rebellion).
1.5.1 Side: The Royalist, the British and Indians, are one side.
The Rebellion, Patriots and French, are the other side.
Note: Although the Factions on the same side share strategic
and tactical affinities, they do not share victory conditions
(7.0). When one Faction wins, the other Faction on the same
side does not win.
1.5.2 Friends and Enemies. Factions on the same side are
Friends with (Friendly to) one another. Factions on opposing
Sides are Enemies to one another. Friendly Factions cannot
Battle, Skirmish, War Path or Partisans one another.
1.5.3 Negotiation. Factions may make any mutual arrange-
ments within the rules. Factions are not permitted to transfer
Resources to another Faction except by Command, Special
Activity or Event (per 2.3). All negotiations are open. The rules
do not bind Factions to agreements.
1.6 Support, Opposition, Casualties And Forts/
Villages
Support and Opposition affect victory and some Commands
and Special Activities.
1.6.1 Cities and Provinces with at least one Population (1.3.2-
.3) always show 1 of 5 levels of its populace’s Support for or
Opposition to the British government that can shift during play:
• Active Support
• Passive Support
• Neutral
• Passive Opposition
• Active Opposition
Spaces with 0 Population are always Neutral, never at Support
or Opposition.
1.6.2 Active Support/Opposition counts double Population
for Total Support/Opposition (1.6.3) affecting victory (7.2,
7.3). Show Support or Opposition with markers placed in each
City or Province. Show Neutral spaces by the absence of such
markers. The four Indian Reserve spaces and the West Indies
are marked as “Always Neutral” and never contain such markers.
1.6.3 Total Support and Total Op-
position. Every Faction’s victory de-
pends on the total value of population
Support or Opposition, respectively.
Adjust “Total Support” or “Total Opposition” on the numbered
edge track per the box below as any change to Support or Op-
position occurs.
Neutral
Total Support = (2 x Population in Active Support) +
(1 x Population in Passive Support)
Total Opposition = (2 x Population in Active Opposition) +
(1 x Population in Passive Opposition)
1.6.4 Casualties. British Regulars, Tories, British Forts, French
Regulars, Patriot Continentals, and Patriot Forts removed due
to certain Commands, Special Activities or as designated by
certain Events are placed in the Casualties box. Units in the
Casualties box are not available to be used in any manner until
the Reset Phase of the Winter Quarters Round (6.7). Exception:
Forts are immediately returned to Available and may be built
immediately but are still counted toward Cumulative British
Casualties or Cumulative Rebellion Casualties. During the
Reset Phase of the Winter Quarters Round, all units in the
Casualties box are returned to Available.
Cumulative British Casualties (CBC)
reflects the total British Regular, To-
ries and Fort Casualties during the
entire game and is tracked by accumu-
lating Casualties as they occur on the numbered edge track.
Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC) reflects the total
French Regular, Continental and Patriot Fort Casualties during
the entire game and is tracked by accumulating Casualties as
they occur on the numbered edge track.
Note: Casualties are not limited to 50. If the CRC or CBC
marker approaches 50, reset both CRC and CBC markers
down 10 (or 20) each. The difference is what matters for
Victory calculations.
1.6.5 Forts and Villages. Patriot Forts and Indian Villages
placed on the map are tracked to determine victory conditions.
British Forts are placed in the Available British Forts track.
Available Patriot Forts and Indian Villages are placed on, and
removed from, the Available Indian Villages/Patriot Forts track
which facilitates calculation of the number placed on the map.
The highest value showing in the empty holding space indicates
the number of Forts/Villages on the map.
Note: The tracks are offset by three so players can look at
the number of Forts/Villages placed and visually determine
which Faction is ahead in its second victory condition (7.2).
1.7 Control
The Rebellion Controls a Province or
City if the pieces of the two Rebellion
Factions (Patriot and French) com-
bined exceed those of the Royalist
Factions (British and Indians) combined. The British Control
a Province or City if Royalist pieces exceed Rebellion pieces
and at least one British piece is present in the space. If Indian
pieces with no British pieces are in a space and they equal or
exceed Rebellion pieces, no Faction Controls the space. Control
affects certain activities. Adjust British Control and Rebellion
Control markers as Control changes due to placement, re-
moval, or movement of pieces. If no Faction Controls a space
then there is no Control marker placed in that space.
1.8 Resources
At any moment, each Faction has between 0 and 50 Resources
that it uses to pay for Commands (3.0). Mark Resources on the
edge track with a cylinder of the Faction’s color (1.5). Factions
are not permitted to transfer Resources to another Faction
except by Command, Special Activity or Event (per 2.3).
1.9 French Naval Intervention
French Naval Intervention (FNI) represents the
commitment of French naval strength to North
America. At each level, the French will have that
number of Blockades placed on Cities. Both the
French and British may adjust the level of FNI through the use
of the Naval Pressure Special Activity after the Treaty of
Alliance card is played (2.3.9). The FNI level must remain at
0 before the Treaty of Alliance card is played. Blockades
are placed by the French as the FNI level is raised. For each
level the FNI is lowered the British remove one Blockade to
the West Indies and flip the counter to the Squadron side.
Available Blockade markers
that have not been placed on a
City reside in the West Indies
holding box (or in the Un-
available French Forces box
depending on the Scenario) on
their Squadron side. They increase British Loss Level in the
West Indies by one total (during any Battle Command) (3.6.5,
3.6.6). FNI level may never exceed the number of Blockades
that are Available.
Blockades may not be placed until after the
Treaty of Alliance card is played (2.3.9).
After Treaty of Alliance is played, Available
Squadrons/Blockades remain in the West
Indies on their Squadron side unless placed
through increasing FNI.
Squadrons/Blockades have the following im-
pact on play:
• No British Muster of Regulars in that City,
nor in an adjacent Colony unless that Colony is also adjacent
to another City that is not Blockaded,
• No British Garrison to or from that City,
• No British March to that City or Provinces adjacent to that
City (unless destination space is adjacent to starting space),
• The population of that City is considered 0 for purposes of
calculating Support and during the Resource Phase of the
Winter Quarters Round, and
• More than one Blockade may be placed on a City but the
additional Blockade has no additional impact.
• British Garrison not available if FNI at Level 3.
Note: FNI-related events may come up before the Treaty
of Alliance card has been played. Factions should ignore
all impacts on FNI and may not place Blockades until the
Treaty of Alliance card is played and Blockades are avail-
able in the West Indies (as Squadrons.)
1.10 Leaders
Leader markers represent political
and military figures who may have
an impact on Events, Commands
and Special Activities. Each Faction
receives one Leader in the Scenario
Set-Up. Only one Leader per Faction is in play
at any time. A Leader can follow any unit of its
Faction anywhere it goes on the map during an
Command or Event. A Leader in the Available Forces box may
be placed on the map or West Indies along with any piece from
the Available Forces box. A Leader has the following impact
on play:
• Leader units cannot be eliminated. If at any time the current
Leader is in a space with no pieces of its Faction, the owning
Faction moves that Leader to any space with the same
Faction’s pieces or to its Available Forces box.
• During the Redeploy Phase of the Winter Quarters Round,
one Faction’s Leader may change (6.5.1). Each Faction may
move its current Leader to any space with that Faction’s
pieces in the following order: Indians, French, British, Patriots
(6.5.2).
• If a Faction plays a Brilliant Stroke card (5.1.4), the
Leader must be in a space involved in at least one of the
Limited Commands (including an origination space for
a March, Scout, Raid or Garrison Limited Command). If
not, the Brilliant Stroke cannot be played. A Brilliant
Stroke card may only be played once (unless Trumped by
another Faction in which case it is returned for future use).
