4.1 Special Activities in General
When a Faction per the Event card sequence of play (2.3) ex-
ecutes a Command in at least one space (3.0), it may also execute
one of its Special Activities (Exception: Limited Commands,
2.3.5). Some Events grant free Special Activities (3.1.2). There is
no added Resource cost for the Special Activity. As with Com-
mands, the executing Faction selects spaces, Factions, or pieces
affected and the order of actions. Select a given space only once
as a location for a given Special Activity. Events may grant free
Special Activities (not further affecting Eligibility, 3.1.2, 5.3).
Important: A Faction may execute its Special Activity at any
one time immediately before, during, or immediately after the
execution of its Command.
EXAMPLE: Indians with 0 Resources uses Plunder or Trade to
pay for the necessary accompanying Commands thereafter (4.1.1).
Play Note: If the 1st Eligible Faction uses a Special Activity,
the 2nd Eligible will have the option of executing the card’s
Event (2.3.4).
4.1.1. Accompanying Commands. Some Special Activities
specify that they may only accompany certain types of Com-
mands (3.0). Certain Special Activities either must occur or
may not occur where their Accompanying Commands occurred.
If not otherwise specified, Special Activities may accompany
any Commands and take place in any otherwise valid spaces.
4.2 British Special Activities
The British may choose from Common Cause, Skirmish or
Naval Pressure Special Activities.
4.2.1 Common Cause. Common Cause allows the British to
utilize War Parties as if they were Tories. It may take place in
any spaces with British pieces and War Parties. It may accom-
pany March or Battle.
PROCEDURE: In a Command space, the British may
utilize one or more War Parties as if they were Tories. War
Parties may never move into or between Cities. Activate War
Parties utilized.
4.2.2 Skirmish. Skirmish uses British Regulars to make a lim-
ited strike on Rebellion pieces. It may accompany any Com-
mand but not in a Battle, Garrison destination or Muster space.
PROCEDURE: In any one space or West Indies with both
British Regulars and Rebellion pieces and no Battle, Gar-
rison destination, or Muster in the space (cubes and Forts
are removed to Casualties):
• Remove one Rebellion cube/Active Militia, or
• 2 Rebellion cubes/Active Militia and one British Regular,
or
• If no Rebellion cubes or Active Militia, remove one Patriot
Fort and one British Regular.
4.2.3 Naval Pressure. Naval Pressure produces
Resources or decreases the level of French Naval
Intervention (FNI). It may accompany any Com-
mand.
PROCEDURE: Before TOA, add 1D3 to British Resources.
After TOA, if FNI is 0, then add 1D3 to British Resources.
If FNI > 0, lower FNI one level. British removes any one
Blockade to the West Indies.
4.3 Patriot Special Activities
Patriots may choose from Persuasion, Partisans or Skirmish
Special Activities.
4.3.1 Persuasion. Persuasion enables Patriots to
gain Resources from Colonies/Cities that are Re-
bellion Controlled. Patriots may Persuade in up to
three Colonies/Cities with Rebellion Control (1.7)
and Underground Militia. It may accompany any Command.
PROCEDURE: For each selected Colony/City, Activate
one Underground Militia there (1.4.3) and add one Patriot
Resource (1.8). Place one Propaganda marker in each unless
none available (there are 12).
4.3.2 Partisans. Partisans is a limited strike on Royalist pieces
in one space. The space must include Royalist pieces and at
least one Underground Militia (1.4.3). It may accompany any
Command but not in a Battle space.
PROCEDURE: In one space with Underground Militia and
Royalist pieces and no Battle (cubes are removed to Casualties):
• Activate one Underground Militia and remove any one
Royalist unit, or
• Activate two Underground Militia, remove one of the two
Militia and remove any two Royalist units, or
• If no War Parties there, Activate two Underground Militia
and remove one of the two Militia and remove one Village.
4.3.3 Skirmish. Skirmish uses Continentals to make a limited
strike on British pieces in one space. The space must include
British pieces and Continentals. It may accompany any Com-
mand but no Battle in the space.
PROCEDURE: In any one space with both Continentals
and British pieces and no Battle (cubes and Forts are removed
to Casualties):
• Remove one British cube, or
• Remove two British cube and one Continental, or
• If no British cubes, remove one British Fort and one
Continental.
4.4 Indian Special Activities
The Indians may choose from Trade, War Path, or Plunder
Special Activities.
4.4.1 Trade. Trade exposes War Parties for mercantile activity to
generate Resources. Trade may occur in any one Province with
an Underground War Party and a Village. It may accompany
any Command.
PROCEDURE: The British chooses an amount (or none) of
Resources to transfer to the Indians. If greater than 0, then
transfer that amount from the British to the Indians and
Activate one Underground War Party in selected Province.
if 0, then Activate one Underground War Party in the
selected Province and add one Resource.
4.4.2 War Path. War Path is a limited strike on Rebellion pieces
in one space. The space must include Rebellion pieces and at
least one Underground War Party (1.4.3). It may accompany
any Command.
PROCEDURE: In any one space with Underground War
Parties and Rebellion pieces (cubes and Forts are removed
to Casualties):
• Activate one Underground War Party and remove one
Rebellion unit, or
• Activate two Underground War Parties, remove one of the
two War Parties and remove two Rebellion units, or
• If no Rebellion units, remove one Patriot Fort, Activate
two Underground War Parties and remove one of the two
War Parties.
4.4.3 Plunder. Plunder takes Resources from the Patriots.
Plunder may only occur where War Parties exceed Rebellion
pieces. It may only accompany a Raid Command.
PROCEDURE: In one Province where there is a Raid
Command and War Parties exceed Rebellion pieces, remove
Resources equal to that Province’s population from the Pa-
triots. Add that number of Resources to the Indians. Indians
remove one War Party from that Province.
4.5 French Special Activities
French may choose only Préparer la Guerre before Treaty of
Alliance. After Treaty of Alliance the French may choose
from Préparer la Guerre, Skirmish, or Naval Pressure Special
Activities.
4.5.1 Préparer la Guerre. Préparer la Guerre allows the French
to make preparations for war and make French Regulars and
Squadrons/Blockades Available. It may accompany any Com-
mand.
PROCEDURE: Move either one Squadron/Blockade marker
to West Indies or three Regulars from the Unavailable Forces
box (1.3.9) to the Available Forces box. The French may
alternatively add two Resources to French Resources.
4.5.2 Skirmish. After Treaty of Alliance, Skirmish uses
French Regulars to make a limited strike on British pieces. It
may accompany any Command but French Agent Mobilization,
and not in a Battle or Muster space.
PROCEDURE: In one space or the West Indies with both
French Regulars and British pieces and no Battle or Muster
(cubes and Forts are removed to Casualties):
• Remove one British cube, or
• Remove two British cubes and one French Regular, or
• If no British cubes, remove one British Fort and one French
Regular.
4.5.3 Naval Pressure. After Treaty of Alliance,
Naval Pressure increases the level of French Naval
Intervention (FNI). It may accompany any Com-
mand but French Agent Mobilization.
PROCEDURE: Raise FNI one level. FNI may not be higher
than the number of Squadron/Blockade available to place on
Cities. The French either:
• Remove a Squadron marker from the West Indies and place
it on any City on its Blockade side, or
• If no Squadron/Blockade markers are in the West Indies,
rearrange Blockade markers already on Cities to any Cities.
Note: There is no limit to the number of Blockades that may
be placed on one City.
