Each Faction has two victory conditions. These victory condi-
tions are specified below and on the Faction player aid sheets.
During victory checks (6.1, 7.2) the two victory conditions are
checked separately; at the end of the game (6.4.3, 7.3) they are
combined into a single total victory margin for each Faction.
7.1 Ranking Wins and Breaking Ties
During the Winter Quarters Round Victory Check Phase (6.1,
7.2), both of a Faction’s victory conditions must have a positive
victory margin in order to win the game. The victory margin
is the amount a Faction is beyond or short of its condition set
forth below. During the final Winter Quarters Round Support
Phase victory calculation (6.4.3, 7.3), both measures are net-
ted together and the highest net measure wins (neither victory
margin needs to be positive).
If any Non-player Faction passes a victory check (7.2), all players
lose equally. Whenever a player Faction passes a victory check
(6.1), the Faction on that side with the highest victory margin
takes first place and the other Faction on that side takes second.
The Faction on the other side that reached the highest victory
margin takes 3rd place, and the other Faction on that Side takes
4th. Also, if the Treaty of Alliance Event was not played,
the French come in last place (regardless of their margin or
whether they are a Non-player).
Ties are resolved in order of Non-players, the Patriots, British,
French and Indian Factions.
If playing solitaire, see also One-Player Victory (8.8).
7.2 During The Victory Check Phase
Check victory at the start of each Winter Quarters Round (6.1).
In order to win, both of a Faction’s victory conditions must
have a positive victory margin (otherwise there is no winner,
in which case play continues). For the French to win, Treaty
of Alliance also must have been played.
Victory conditions are:
• British: 1. Support exceeds Opposition by more than 10 and
2. Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC) is greater than
Cumulative British Casualties (CBC).
• Patriots: 1. Opposition exceeds Support by more than 10 and
2. Patriot Forts plus 3 is greater than Villages.
• French: 1. Opposition exceeds Support by more than 10
and 2. Cumulative British Casualties (CBC) is greater
than Cumulative Rebellion Casualties (CRC). Treaty of
Alliance must have been played.
• Indians: 1. Support exceeds Opposition by more than 10 and
2. Villages less 3 is greater than Patriot Forts.
Combined Victory: A player running both Factions of one side
achieves a combined Royalist or Rebellion win at victory check
if all of both the player’s Factions’ victory conditions are fulfilled.
7.3 During The Support Phase
If the final Winter Quarters Round (2.4.1) Support Phase is
completed without a victory check win (7.2), the victory mar-
gin for the two victory conditions for each Faction are added
together to determine its total victory margin. The Faction with
the highest total victory margin wins.
Note: Positive victory margins are not required to win at
Game End. (6.4.3) A player running both Factions of one
side uses the worse of the two Factions’ total victory margins.
The French cannot win without having played the Treaty
of Alliance card.
Victory conditions are:
• British: Support less Opposition plus Cumulative Rebellion
Casualties (CRC) less Cumulative British Casualties (CBC).
• Patriots: Opposition less Support plus Patriot Forts plus 3
less Villages.
• French: Opposition less Support plus Cumulative British
Casualties (CBC) less Cumulative Rebellion Casualties
(CRC). Treaty of Alliance must have been played.
• Indians: Support less Opposition plus Villages less 3 less
Patriot Forts.
