Each Event bears a title, card number, Period Event years, itali-
cized flavor text, and Event text. Flavor text provides historical
interest and has no effect on play.
5.1 Executing Events
When a Faction executes an Event, it carries out the Event
text literally (sometimes involving actions or decisions by other
Factions). Unless otherwise specified, the executing Faction
makes all selections involved in implementing the text, such as
which pieces are affected or which Faction will execute a Free
Command (5.3). If another Faction is specified or selected to
take an action, that Faction decides the details of the action.
5.1.1 Where Event text contradicts rules, the Event takes
precedence. However:
• Events may not violate stacking (and so never place Forts/
Villages where there are already two nor place French pieces
on the Map before the Treaty of Alliance card has been
played (2.3.9)).
• Events place only Available pieces (1.4.1) and markers unless
specifying from Unavailable, Casualties or West Indies; they
remove rather than replace if the replacement is not Available
or if stacking (1.4.2) would be violated.
• Events may not raise a Faction’s Resources beyond 50 or
below 0 (1.8).
5.1.2 If two Events contradict, the currently played Event takes
precedence.
5.1.3 An executed Event’s text that can be implemented must
be. If not all of its text can be carried out, implement that
which can.
5.1.4 Brilliant Stroke cards are Events held by a Faction
and may have preconditions for play. They Trump other Event
cards, including Faction order. The executing Faction must
execute the Event described on the card (2.3.8).
Card Number
Illustration
Title
Italicized
flavor text
Event text
Shaded Text
(See Dual
Use 5.2)
Period Event
years
Faction flags
Musket (8.1)
Note: Muskets or Swords below Faction symbols regard
Non-player instructions (8.1).
5.2 Dual Use
Many Events have both unshaded and shaded Event text. The
executing Faction may select either the unshaded or shaded
text to carry out (not both). The unshaded text helps the British
and/or Indians while the shaded text often favors the Patriots
and/or French. A Faction may select either text option regard-
less of Faction.

5.3 Free Commands
Some Events allow the Executing or another Faction an im-
mediate Command or Special Activity that interrupts the usual
sequence of play and typically is free: it bears no Resource cost
to any Faction involved and does not affect Eligibility (3.1.2,
2.3.1), though other requirements remain unless Trumped by
Event text (5.1.1)
