3.1 Commands In General
The Faction executing a Command chooses one of the Com-
mands listed on its Faction player aid sheet and, if applicable,
selects the map spaces (typically several) to be involved. Select
a given space only once for a given Command.
Commands usually cost Resources, often per space selected;
the paying Faction must have enough Resources to pay for the
Command, including in each selected space.
The executing Faction chooses the order of the spaces in which
the Command is resolved, the Enemy Factions (1.5) or pieces
to be affected (targeted), and the friendly pieces to be placed,
replaced, removed, or moved. Actions affecting another Fac-
tion’s pieces, Friendly or Enemy, do not require that Faction’s
permission.
3.1.1 Pawns. If desired, mark spaces selected for Commands
(3.0), Special Activities (4.0), or other actions with gray and
black pawns. The pawns are for convenience, not a limit on play.
3.1.2 Free Commands. Certain Events (5.0) or phases (6.2.2),
grant free Commands or Special Activities: they cost no Re-
sources to any Faction involved and, if executed by a Faction
other than the one playing an Event, could leave it Eligible
(2.3.6). Other requirements and procedures still apply unless
modified by Event text (5.1).
3.2 British Commands
The British chooses from Muster, Garrison, March, and Battle
Commands
3.2.1 Muster. Muster Commands add British forces and can
build Support (1.6). Select any qualifying space and pay one
Resource per selected space.
• To place British Regulars, the British Faction may select any
one City that is not Blockaded or an adjacent Colony, or the
West Indies.
• To place Tories, the British Faction may select any Cities
or Colonies (not the West Indies) containing or adjacent to
British Regulars or British Forts, not at Active Opposition.
PROCEDURE: First, in one selected City (except a Block-
aded City), adjacent Colony or the West Indies, place up to
six Regulars.
Next, in any selected Cities or Colonies (not at Active Op-
position) containing or adjacent to British Regulars or Forts,
place up to two Tories or one if at Passive Opposition.
Then, in up to one selected Muster space (including West
Indies if selected):
• Replace any three British cubes (Regulars or Tories) with
one Fort, or
• Reward Loyalty (6.4.1) to build Support. The British must
have one or more British Regulars, one or more Tories, and
Control (1.7) in the space and must pay one added Resource
per level of Opposition and Support (and Propaganda and
Raid marker) (even if Muster was free (3.1.2)). There is
no limit to the number of levels shifted when Rewarding
Loyalty during Muster.
3.2.2 Garrison. Garrison Commands protect Cities by moving
in Regulars and locating and displacing Enemy units there. Pay
two Resources total (not per space). If a Limited Command
(2.3.5), all moving British Regulars must end in a single desti-
nation City. A Blockaded City or units starting there may not
be included in any part of a Garrison Command.
PROCEDURE: Move any number of British Regulars from
any spaces (not Blockaded Cities) to Cities that are not Block-
aded. Then, in each City that is not Blockaded (whether or not
a British Regular just moved there), Activate one Militia for
every three British cubes there. Then, if desired, in one City
(under British Control, no Patriot Fort and not Blockaded)
displace all Rebellion units to an adjacent space at no added
cost. If executing a Limited Command (2.3.5), the units
Activated and/or displaced must be in/from the destination
City. Garrison not available if FNI at level 3.
3.2.3 March. March Commands may move cubes and locate
Militia. Select any spaces as destinations. Pay one Resource per
destination space selected. If executing a Limited Command
(2.3.5), all moving pieces must end in a single destination space.
PROCEDURE: Move any British Regulars onto an adja-
cent space (1.3.6) or, if moving units are in or adjacent to a
City (not Blockaded), to another City (not Blockaded) or a
Province adjacent to it. Tories may only accompany (through
the entire process) British Regulars 1 for 1 (Any cubes that
move must reach destination spaces paid for).
Then, in selected destination spaces, Activate one Militia
(1.4.3) for every three British cubes there (whether they just
moved or were already there). No unit moves more than once.
3.2.4 Battle. Battle Commands allow the British to fight Re-
bellion Factions with the possible help of Indians. Select any
spaces and/or West Indies with British and Rebellion pieces.
Pay one Resource per space selected.
PROCEDURE: In one space or West Indies at a time, ex-
ecute Battle according to the Battle Procedure Table (3.6).
3.3 Patriot Commands
Patriots choose from Rally, March, Battle and Rabble-Rousing.
3.3.1 Rally. Rally Commands add or recover Patriot forces.
Select any spaces without Active Support (1.6) and pay one
Resource per space selected. Militia may not be placed in an
Indian Reserve space or the West Indies.
PROCEDURE: In each selected space, place one Available
Militia or replace two units with one Fort. If the space already
has at least one Patriot Fort, may instead either:
• Place a number of Militia up to the number of Patriot Forts
there plus the space’s Population value (1.3.2-.3), or
• Move any Militia from any adjacent spaces to there and
flip all Militia there Underground (whether they moved
or not) (1.4.3).
The Patriots may select any one Rally space with a Patriot
Fort and replace any Militia with Continentals.
No Militia may be placed in Indian Reserve spaces.
No unit moves more than once.
3.3.2 March. March Commands may move Militia, Conti-
nentals and French Regulars and locate War Parties. Select
any spaces as the destinations of the moving units. Pay one
Resource per destination selected. For each destination space
French enter (Patriot’s choice), the French must also pay one
Resource. If a Limited Command (2.3.5), all moving units must
end in a single destination space.
PROCEDURE: The Patriot moves any of its units desired
into adjacent spaces (1.3.6). No unit moves more than once.
French Regulars may accompany Continentals 1 for 1 at the
Patriot’s option. Units moving from one space to another
move as a single group. Activate one War Party for every
two Continentals in the destination space. Set Militia of a
moving group to Active (1.4.3) if:
• The destination is a British Controlled City before the
move, and
• The moving group’s number of units plus the number of
British cubes in the destination space exceeds 3.
Note: March often Activates Militia, but moves by Event
(5.0) do so only if specified.
3.3.3 Battle. Battle Commands allow the Patriots to fight
Royalist Factions with the possible help of the French. Select
any spaces with Patriot and Royalist pieces. Pay one Resource
per space. For each space French pieces are involved, French
must also pay 1 Resource.
PROCEDURE: In one space at a time, execute according
to the Battles Procedure Table (3.6). For each space French
Regulars are involved in the Battle (at the Patriot’s option
if the French have one or more Resources), the French must
also pay one Resource.
3.3.4 Rabble-Rousing. Rabble-Rous-
ing Commands in Provinces or Cities
build Opposition (1.6) and place
Propaganda markers that hinder future
Royalist efforts to influence it. Select any spaces with Rebellion
Control and Patriot pieces or at least one Underground Militia.
Pay one Resource per space selected.
PROCEDURE: Place a Propaganda marker and shift one
level toward Active Opposition. Unless Rebellion Control
with a Patriot piece, activate one Underground Militia in
each selected space.
NOTE: Do not place a Propaganda marker if all are already
on the map (there are 12). Adjust Total Support or Opposi-
tion (1.6).
Note: The 12 Propaganda markers have a different historical
character on each. This is provided as historical color only. The
Patriots select which Propaganda marker to use.
3.4 Indian Commands
Indians choose from Gather, March, Scout and Raid.
3.4.1 Gather. Gather Commands add or recover Indian forces.
Select any Provinces at Neutral, Passive Opposition or Pas-
sive Support (not Active Opposition or Active Support.) Pay
one Resource per Province selected. Pay 0 for the first Indian
Reserve Province.
PROCEDURE: In each selected Province, place one Avail-
able War Party or replace two War Parties with one Village.
If the Province already has at least one Village, may instead
either:
• Place a number of Available War Parties up to the number
of Villages there plus one or
• Move any War Parties from any adjacent spaces to there
and flip all War Parties there Underground (whether they
moved or not) (1.4.3).
No unit moves more than once.
3.4.2 March. March Commands move War Parties. Select any
Provinces (not Cities) as destinations of the moving pieces.
Pay one Resource per destination Province. Pay 0 for the first
destination where all War Parties are originating from Indian
Reserve Provinces. If a Limited Command (2.3.5), all moving
War Parties must end in a single destination Province.
PROCEDURE: Move any War Parties into adjacent Prov-
inces (1.3.6). No War Parties move more than once. War
Parties moving from one Province to another move as a
single group. Set Underground War Parties moving to Ac-
tive (1.4.3) if:
• The destination space is a Colony Controlled by the
Rebellion before the move, and
• The moving group’s number of pieces plus the number of
Militia in the destination Province exceed 3.
Note: March often Activates War Parties but moves by Event
(5.0) do so only if specified.
3.4.3 Scout. Scout Commands allow War Parties to move
British cubes into an adjacent Province and Skirmish. Pay one
Resource. British also pay one Resource.
PROCEDURE: From one selected Province, the Indians
move at least one War Party into an adjacent Province (not
City) (1.3.6). Activate all moving War Parties. At least one
British Regular must (and Tories up to the number of Regu-
lars may) move with the War Parties. All choices as to who
to move is made at the Indians’ option. All pieces move from
one Province to another as a single group. Activate all Militia
in the destination space. Then the Indians may use British
Regulars to Skirmish (4.2.2) in the destination Province.
3.4.4 Raid. Raid Commands shift
Opposition in up to three Provinces
one level toward Neutral (1.6) and
place Raid markers that hinder future
efforts to influence it. Select up to three Provinces with (or
adjacent to Provinces with) at least one Underground War
Party and at Opposition; pay one Resource per Province.
PROCEDURE: In up to three Provinces, move in up to one
adjacent War Party. Then in each selected Province, Activate
one Underground War Party to place a Raid marker and
shift Opposition one level toward Neutral. Each affected
Province must have a newly-Activated War Party that ei-
ther just moved in or was already there. Do not place a Raid
marker if all are already on the map (there are 12). Adjust
Total Opposition (1.6).
Note: The 12 Raid markers have a different Indian tribe on
the back of each. This is provided as historical color only. The
Indian player selects which Raid marker to use.
3.5 French Commands
French choose from French Agent Mobilization and Roderigue
Hortalez et Cie before the Treaty of Alliance. After the
Treaty of Alliance, the French may choose Roderigue
Hortalez et Cie, Muster, March and Battle.
3.5.1 French Agent Mobilization. French Agent Mobilization
Commands allows the French to utilize its agents in North
America to place Patriot units before the Treaty of Alliance
card has been played. Select one of the following: Quebec, New
York, New Hampshire, or Massachusetts. The space may not be
at Active Support. Pay one Resource.
PROCEDURE: In the selected Province, place two Available
Militia or one Continental.
3.5.2 Roderigue Hortalez et Cie. Roderigue Hortalez et Cie
was a Spanish trading company used as a front for funneling
gunpowder, equipment and currency to the Patriots. The French
may use this Command to increase Patriot Resources before and
after the Treaty of Alliance card has been played.
PROCEDURE: The French pays one or more Resources as
they choose. Patriot Resources are increased by that amount
plus 1.
3.5.3 Muster. Muster Commands augment French forces after
the Treaty of Alliance card has been played. Select any one
Colony or City with Rebellion Control or the West Indies.
Pay two Resources.
PROCEDURE: In the selected Colony, City or West Indies,
the French may place up to four Regulars. Then, if desired in
the selected Colony or City and if Patriots have one or more
Resources, replace two French Regulars with one Patriot Fort
and Patriots pay one Resource.
3.5.4 March. March Commands move French Regulars and
potentially Continentals after the Treaty of Alliance card
has been played. Select any spaces as the destination that already
have Patriot pieces or any space if bringing along one or more
Continentals. Pay one Resource per destination space selected.
For each destination space Continentals enter (French choice),
the Patriots must also pay one Resource. If a Limited Command
(2.3.5), all moving pieces must end in a single destination space.
PROCEDURE: Move any French Regulars into an adjacent
(1.3.6) space containing a Patriot piece or, if moving units
are in or adjacent to a Rebellion Controlled City, to another
Rebellion Controlled City or a Province adjacent to it (similar
to British March (3.2.3) except that Cities must be Rebellion
Controlled). Continentals may only accompany (through
the entire process) French Regulars 1 for 1 (any cubes that
move must reach destination spaces paid for). Continentals
accompany French Regulars at the French’s option. No unit
moves more than once.
3.5.5 Battle. Battle Commands allow the French to fight Roy-
alist Factions with the possible help of the Patriots after the
Treaty of Alliance card has been played. Select any spaces
and/or West Indies with French and Royalist pieces. Pay one
Resource per space or West Indies. For each space Patriot pieces
are involved, Patriot must also pay 1 Resource.
PROCEDURE: In one space or West Indies at a time,
execute according to the Battle Procedure Table (3.6). For
each space Patriot pieces are involved in the Battle (at the
French’s option if the Patriots have one or more Resources),
the Patriots must also pay one Resource.
3.6 Battle Procedure
Whenever a Faction initiates Battle, whether proceeding from
a Battle Command (3.2.4, 3.3.3, 3.5.5), by Event (2.3.4), or
Winter Quarters Round (6.2.2), this Battle procedure is used
(also following the common Battle Procedure Table in the
player aids).
3.6.1 Factional Cooperation. Decisions in the Battle Procedure
are always made by the executing Faction unless otherwise
specified. See Definitions in 3.6.2 below for additional detail.
When Attacking: The Faction executing the Battle Command
makes all choices in the Battle for that side. French may only
use Patriot pieces and Leader if Patriots pay. Patriots may
only use French pieces and Leader if French pay. British may
always use Indian pieces and Leader if a War Party is in the
space during the Battle. Indians are not capable of executing
a Battle Command.
When Defending: British or Patriots make all choices for
combined Defending Royalist or Rebellion side respectively. If
solely French or Indian pieces are Defending, then that Faction
makes all choices. All Leaders are applicable when Defending.
3.6.2 Definitions. Attacker is the Faction and side executing
the Battle Command. Defender is the enemy of the Attacker.
Force Level refers to the total of each side’s cubes that can
participate, half Active Militia or War Parties if they can par-
ticipate (rounding down), and Forts if Defending. Loss Level
refers to the result of the enemy side’s dice roll plus modifiers
for the side taking the losses.
3.6.3 Force Levels. Attacker then Defender calculates their
own Force Level.
• Choose whether or not to Activate any of its own side’s
Underground units, War Parties (if British Attacking or either
British or Indians Defending) or Militia (if Patriots paid or
either Patriots or French Defending).
• Add half (rounding down) Active War Parties (if British
Attacking or Royalist Defending) or Militia (if Patriots paid
or either Patriots or French Defending) to own cubes.
o If British Attack, include Tories only up to the number of
British Regulars.
o If Rebellion Attack, if that Faction paid, add French
Regulars or Continentals up to the number of own Faction’s
cubes.
o If Defending, include all that Side’s cubes, Forts and half
of Active Militia or War Parties.
3.6.4 Enemy Loss Level. Attacker rolls and adds modifiers to
the roll to determine their Enemy’s (Defender) Loss Level.
Then, Defender rolls and adds modifiers to the roll to determine
their Enemy’s (Attacker) Loss Level.
• Divide the Force Level by 3, rounding down, to determine
how many D3s to roll (not more than 3). If Force Level is
two or less, then roll no dice and consider the die roll 0.
• Roll the dice.
• Adjust the dice roll per the modifiers below in 3.6.5 and 3.6.6.
The modified total is the Enemy Loss Level.
3.6.5 Defender Loss Level modifiers (cumulative)
At least half Attacking Cubes are Regulars (if any)..... +1
At least one Attacking side piece Underground ......... +1
At least one Attacking Leader .................................... +1
Attacking including French with Lauzun ................... +1
British Attacking in Blockaded City........................... –1
British Attacking in West Indies and at least one
Squadron is present ................................................. –1
Per Defending Fort .................................................... –1
Indians Defending in Indian Reserve ......................... –1
Patriots/French Defending with Washington ............. –1
3.6.6 Attacker Loss Level modifiers (cumulative)
At least half Defending Cubes are Regulars (if any) ... +1
At least one Defending side piece Underground ........ +1
At least one Defending Leader ................................... +1
British Defending in Blockaded City ......................... –1
British Defending in West Indies and at least one
Squadron is present ................................................. –1
Per Defending Fort..................................................... +1
3.6.7 Removal. Attacker then Defender must remove own
pieces with values totaling their modified Loss Level or more
(none if negative). For purposes of determining the number of
pieces to be removed, Regulars, Continentals and Forts each
count as two losses and all other pieces count as one loss each.
Liberty or Death ~ Rules of Play16© 2015, 2016 GMT Games, LLC
Loss Value Table
Counts as two losses British Regulars, French Regulars,
Continentals and Forts
Counts as one loss Tories, Militia, War Parties and
Villages
Pieces are removed subject to the priorities below.
• Royalists alternate removing one each British Regulars then
Tories. Once exhausted, remove Active War Parties. Once
exhausted, if and only if Royalists Defending, Villages then
Forts.
• Rebellion alternate removing one each French Regulars then
Continentals then Active Militia. Once exhausted, if and only
if Rebellion Defending, Forts.
• Ignore Underground War Parties and Underground Militia.
• Place all removed British Regulars, Tories, French Regulars,
and Continentals into the Casualties box. Forts also count
as Casualties but return to Available immediately. Adjust the
CBC and CRC markers accordingly. Other removed pieces
to Available.
3.6.8 Win the Day. Battle winner potentially adjusts Support/
Opposition.
• Win the Day occurs only in Battles with loser removing a
cube or a Fort, loser removing 2+ pieces, and not in West
Indies.
• Winner is the side losing the fewest pieces unless one side
is eliminated (excluding Underground War Parties and
Underground Militia), in which case the surviving side is
the winner. Defender is the winner if equal. If both sides
are eliminated (excluding Underground War Parties and
Underground Militia), there is no winner or loser.
• Shift Support/Opposition levels in the Battle space by half
the number of pieces the Loser removed (rounding down)
to a maximum of three levels. (If Rebellion is the winner,
Washington can double to no more than six.)
o If all shifts are not possible in the Battle space, British (if
Royalist winner) or Patriots (if Rebellion winner) may use
remaining shifts in adjacent spaces.
• If Rebellion winner, Patriots may free Rally in any one eligible
space, and French may move any Blockades from the Battle
City to another City.
