2.1 Set-Up
Follow the instructions on last four pages of this rule book to
choose a Scenario and various play options, assign Factions to
players, prepare the draw deck, and set up markers and forces.
2.2 Start
Begin play by revealing the top card of the draw deck and
placing it onto a played cards pile. Then reveal the next card
and place it on top of the draw deck. The card on the played
card stack is played first; the card on top of the draw deck will
be played next.
Note: Players will see one card ahead into the deck (2.3.7).
All played cards and the number of cards in the draw deck are
open to inspection.
When a Winter Quarters card is turned up, stop play and
swap it with the played card. Conduct a Winter Quarters Round
immediately (6.0).
Record Steps: As the steps of each Event card play are com-
pleted, place a cylinder of the Faction’s color (1.5) into the
appropriate box on the Sequence of Play track (or, for Winter
Quarters Rounds 6.0, advance the Winter Quarters marker).
2.3 Event Cards
When playing an Event card, up to two Factions will execute
Commands or the Event.
• Factions whose cylinder is in the “Eligible” box receive these
options in the left-to-right order of the Faction symbols
shown at the top of the card.
• Factions with cylinders in the “Ineligible” box do nothing.
2.3.1 Eligibility. Factions that did not execute a Command or
Event on the previous card are Eligible (their cylinders will
start the card in the “Eligible” box per 2.3.6). Factions that did
are Ineligible. (All Factions start the game Eligible.) See also
Free Commands (3.1.2).
2.3.2 Faction Order. The Eligible Faction with the leftmost
symbol (skipping any Ineligible Factions) is the 1st Eligible to
execute a Command or Event or to Pass. The next leftmost is
the 2nd Eligible.
2.3.3 Passing. If a 1st or 2nd Eligible Faction opts to Pass, it
receives +1 Resource if Patriots or Indians, or +2 Resources if
British or French, and remains Eligible for the next card. The
next leftmost Eligible Faction then replaces the Passing Fac-
tion as the new 1st or 2nd Eligible Faction and receives the
same options to execute or Pass. If the last (rightmost) Eligible
Faction Passes, adjust cylinders (2.3.6) and play the next card.
2.3.4 Options for Eligible Factions.
1 ST ELIGIBLE: If the 1st Eligible Faction does not Pass (2.3.3),
it may execute either:
• a Command (Com) (3.0)—with or without a Special Activity
(4.0); or
• the Event shown on the card.
OPTIONS FOR 2 ND ELIGIBLE: If the 2nd Eligible Faction
does not Pass (2.3.3), it also may execute a Command and pos-
sibly the Event, but its options depend on what the 1st Eligible
Faction executed:
• Command Only: If the 1st Eligible Faction executed a
Command only, the 2nd Eligible Faction may execute a
Limited Command (2.3.5).
• Command and Special Activity: If the 1st Eligible Faction
executed a Command with a Special Activity, the 2nd Eligible
Faction may execute a Limited Command or instead execute
the Event.
• Event: If the 1st Eligible Faction executed the Event, the
2nd Eligible Faction may execute a Command, with a Special
Activity if desired.
For a Command to qualify as executed it must occur within
(select) at least one space, with or without effect.
EXCEPTION: The French Command Roderigue Hortalez et Cie
(3.5.2) never selects any space, but counts as executed if at least one
French Resource is paid.
Note: For ease of reference, these options are illustrated on
the Sequence of Play aid sheet and on the game board.
2.3.5 Limited Command. A Limited Command is a Com-
mand in just one space with no Special Activity. If the Limited
Command involves pieces from multiple spaces, it can only
include one destination space. A Limited Command counts as
a Command. See also Non-player Commands (8.1).
2.3.6 Adjust Eligibility. After the 1st and 2nd Eligible Factions
complete all execution of Commands, Special Activities, and
Events (or after Eligible Factions instead have Passed), adjust
cylinders on the Sequence of Play track as follows:
• Any Faction that did not execute a Command or Event (and
was not rendered Ineligible by an Event) to the “Eligible” box.
• Any Faction that executed a Command (including a Limited
Command) or Event to the “Ineligible” box (unless otherwise
specified by the Event; see also Free Commands, 3.1.2).
• If a Faction played a Brilliant Stroke card (2.3.8), all
Factions to “Eligible”.
Play Note: Some Events (5.0) will enable the executing Fac-
tion to remain Eligible or render other Factions Ineligible
through the next card. As a reminder, mark a Faction thus
remaining Eligible by placing its cylinder at the left edge of
its Sequence of Play “Event” box. Mark a Faction thus ren-
dered Ineligible by placing its cylinder under the executing
Faction’s, to show that it will be Ineligible for the next card.
2.3.7 Next Card. After adjusting Eligibility, move the draw
deck’s top card onto the played card pile face-up and reveal
the draw deck’s next card. If the just revealed card is a Winter
Quarters card, switch it with the played Event card, so that
the Winter Quarters card becomes the current played card
(2.2, 2.4). Play the played card, proceeding with the appropriate
sequence (2.3 or 6.0).
2.3.8 Brilliant Stroke. Each
Faction begins the Scenarios with
one Brilliant Stroke card
(5.1.4) except for the French, who
begin with two including the
Treaty of Alliance, but the
Treaty of Alliance must be
played first. Brilliant Stroke
cards are a type of Event (5.0). A
Faction may play its Brilliant
Stroke card to cancel and discard
a currently played Event card if:
• the Faction playing the Brilliant Stroke card is Eligible,
• the 1st Eligible Faction has not yet taken an action, and
• no Winter Quarters card is showing.
PROCEDURE: The Faction with the Brilliant Stroke
card interrupts the usual Sequence of Play by placing the
Brilliant Stroke card over the played Event card and
executing the instructions on the Brilliant Stroke card.
The Brilliant Stroke card stays in the played card pile, as
normal. The played Event card under the Brilliant Stroke
card remains there and is never played.
BRILLIANT STROKE CARD EVENTS: The Faction play-
ing a Brilliant Stroke card may execute the instructions with
no Resource cost. (EXCEPTION: British must pay for Reward
Loyalty). Each Command and Special Activity is independent
(but still allows a Common Cause Special Activity to affect a
March or Battle Command on the same Brilliant Stroke card)
and not limited by other actions on this card. All Factions are
moved to Eligible after the play of a Brilliant Stroke card
including the Faction that played it.
TRUMPING BRILLIANT STROKE CARDS: Trumping is
the act of playing a Faction’s Brilliant Stroke card to cancel
a just-played Brilliant Stroke card. (The Trump card takes
the place of the Trumped card and is executed as if it had been
played first.) A Trumped Brilliant Stroke card is returned
to its owner for possible use later. The Treaty of Alliance
Brilliant Stroke card may Trump another Faction’s Bril-
liant Stroke card. The Indian Faction may Trump another
Faction’s Brilliant Stroke card (excluding the Treaty of
Alliance Brilliant Stroke card); The French Faction may Trump the Patriots or British; British may Trump the Patriots;
Patriots may not Trump.
Play Note: The 1st Eligible Faction need not declare what it
would execute before a Faction must decide whether to play
its Brilliant Stroke card.
2.3.9 Brilliant Stroke - Treaty of Alliance. The French
Faction chooses when to play the Treaty of Alliance card
subject to the following conditions.
• The French have accumulated more than 15
Available French Regulars and Squadrons/
Blockades plus Cumulative British Casualties
(CBC) (1.6.4, 7.2). This total is also referred to
as French Preparations and is tracked on the edge track;
• the French Faction is Eligible;
• the 1st Eligible Faction has not yet taken an action; and
• no Winter Quarters card is showing.
Treaty of Alliance replaces and cancels the played Event
card as long as no one has acted on that Event card. It can also
Trump (2.3.8) any other Brilliant Stroke card from another
Faction and it cannot be Trumped by another Faction. This still
allows the French Faction to play one Brilliant Stroke later.
All Factions are Eligible after this card is played. The French
Faction must execute the event and nothing else.
After the French play Treaty of Alliance:
• They have a second Brilliant Stroke card available to use
from that point forward.
• They may execute any Commands and Special Activities
except those that are limited to before Treaty of Alliance.
Before the Treaty of Alliance, the French may execute
only Roderigue Hortalez et Cie (3.5.2) and French Agent
Mobilization (3.5.1) and the Préparer la Guerre (4.5.1) plus
Events from Event cards (5.3).
• French pieces may now be deployed on the map and West
Indies (and conversely may not before the Treaty of
Alliance).
• They qualify for Victory (7.2).
2.4 W inter Q uarters Card
If playing a Winter Quarters card, conduct a Winter Quar-
ters Round (6.0).
2.4.1 Final Winter Quarters. If the Final Winter Quarters
card’s Support Phase is completed without a victory (6.1), the
game ends: determine victory under 7.3.
Play Note: Each series of Event cards up to a Winter
Quarters card is a “Campaign,” representing one year of war.
